Treaty, and then under new compulsion.

_Fortuné._--Josephine's dog (see note to Letter 2, Series B).


FOOTNOTES

  [41] No. 89 of Napoleon III.'s Correspondence of Napoleon I., vol. i.,
       the last letter signed Buonaparte; after March 24 we only find
       Bonaparte.

  [42] Compelled to surrender Genoa, before Marengo takes place, he
       swears to the Austrian general he will be back there in
       fourteen days, and keeps his word.

  [43] Two days later he evidently feels this letter too severe, and
       writes: "All goes well. Pillage is less pronounced. This first
       thirst of an army destitute of everything is quenched. The poor
       fellows are excusable; after having sighed for three years at
       the top of the Alps, they arrive in the Promised Land, and wish
       to taste of it."

  [44] Bingham, with his customary ill-nature, remarks that Bonaparte,
       "in spite of the orders of the Directory, took upon himself to
       sign the armistice." These orders, dated March 6th, were
       intended for a novice, and no longer applicable to the
       conqueror of two armies, and which a Despatch on the way, dated
       April 25th, already modified. Jomini admits the wisdom of this
       advantageous peace, which secured Nice and Savoy to France, and
       gave her all the chief mountain-passes leading into Italy.




SERIES B


No. 1.

_July 6, Sortie from Mantua of the Austrians._--According to Jomini
the French on this occasion were not successful (vol. viii. 162). In
one of his several letters to the Directory on this date is seen
Bonaparte's anxiety for reinforcements; the enemy has already 67,000
men against his available 40,000. Meanwhile he is helping the
Corsicans to throw off the British yoke, and believes that the French
possession of Leghorn will enable the French to gain that island
without firing a shot.


No. 2.

_Marmirolo._--On July 12th he writes to the Directory from Verona that
for some days he and the enemy have been watching each other. "Woe to
him who makes a false move." He indicates that he is about to make a
_coup de main_ on Mantua, with 300 men dressed in Austrian uniforms.
He is by no means certain of success, which "depends entirely on
luck--either on a dog[45] or a goose." He complains of much sickness
among his men round Mantua, owing to the heat and miasmata from the
marshes, but so far no deaths. He will be ready to make Venice
disgorge a few millions shortly, if the Directory make a quarrel in
the interim.

On the 13th he was with Josephine, as he writes from Milan, but leaves
on the 14th, and on the 17th is preparing a _coup de_ _main_ with 800
grenadiers, which, as we see from the next letter, fails.

_Fortuné._--Arnault tells an anecdote of this lap-dog, which in 1794,
in the days of the Terror, had been used as a bearer of secret
despatches between Josephine in prison and the governess of her
children outside the grille. Henceforward Josephine would never be
parted from it. One day in June 1797 the dog was lying on the same
couch as its mistress, and Bonaparte, accosting Arnault and pointing
to the dog with his finger, said, "You see that dog there. He is my
rival. He was in possession of Madame's bed when I married her. I
wished to make him get out--vain hope! I was told I must resign
myself to sleep elsewhere, or consent to share with him. That was
sufficiently exasperating, but it was a question of taking or
leaving, and I resigned myself. The favourite was less accommodating
than I. I bear the proof of it in this leg."

Not content with barking at every one, he bit not only men but other
dogs, and was finally killed by a mastiff, much to Bonaparte's secret
satisfaction; for, as St. Amand adds, "he could easily win battles,
accomplish miracles, make or unmake principalities, but could not show
a dog the door."


No. 3.

"_The village of Virgil._"--Michelet (Jusqu'au 18 _Brumaire_) thinks
that here he got the idea of the Fête of Virgil, established a few
months later. In engravings of the hero of Italy we see him near the
tomb of Virgil, his brows shaded by a laurel crown.


No. 4.

_Achille._--Murat. He had been appointed one of Bonaparte's
aides-de-camp February 29th, made General of Brigade after the Battle
of Lodi (May 10th); is sent to Paris after Junot with nine trophies,
and arrives there first. He flirts there outrageously with Josephine,
but does not escort her back to her husband.


No. 5.

'_Will o' the wisp_,' _i.e._ _l'ardent_.--This word, according to
Ménage, was given by the Sieur de St. Germain to those lively young
sparks who, about the year 1634, used to meet at the house of Mr.
Marsh (M. de Marest), who was one of them.


No. 6.

_The needs of the army._--Difficulties were accumulating, and Napoleon
was, as he admits at St. Helena, seriously alarmed. Wurmser's force
proves to be large, Piedmont is angry with the Republic and ready to
rise, and Venice and Rome would willingly follow its example; the
English have taken Porto-Ferrajo, and their skilful minister, Windham,
is sowing the seeds of discord at Naples. Although on July 20th he has
written a friend in Corsica that "all smiles on the Republic," he
writes Saliceti, another brother Corsican, very differently on August
1st. "Fortune appears to oppose us at present.... I have raised the
siege of Mantua; I am at Brescia with nearly all my army. I shall take
the first opportunity of fighting a battle with the enemy which will
decide the fate of Italy--if I'm beaten, I shall retire on the Adda;
if I win, I shall not stop in the marshes of Mantua.... Let the
citadels of Milan, Tortona, Alessandria, and Pavia be provisioned....
We are all very tired; I have ridden five horses to death." Reading
between the lines of this letter to Josephine, it is evident that he
thinks she will be safer with him than at Milan--Wurmser having the
option of advancing _viâ_ Brescia on Milan, and cutting off the French
communications. The Marshal's fatal mistake was in using only half his
army for the purpose. This raising of the siege of Mantua (July 31st)
was heart-rending work for Bonaparte, but, as Jomini shows, he had no
artillery horses, and it was better to lose the siege train,
consisting of guns taken from the enemy, than to jeopardise the whole
army. Wurmser had begun his campaign successfully by defeating
Massena, and pushing back Sauret at Salo. "The Austrians," wrote
Massena, "are drunk with brandy, and fight furiously," while his men
are famished and can only hang on by their teeth. Bonaparte calls his
first war council, and thinks for a moment of retreat, but Augereau
insists on fighting, which is successfully accomplished while Wurmser
is basking himself among the captured artillery outside Mantua.
Bonaparte had been perfectly honest in telling the Directory his
difficulties, and sends his brother Louis to the Directory for that
purpose on the eve of battle. He is complimented in a letter from the
Directory dated August 12th--a letter probably the more genuine as
they had just received a further despatch announcing a victory. On
August 3rd Bonaparte won a battle at Lonato, and the next day Augereau
gained great laurels at Castiglione; in later years the Emperor often
incited Augereau by referring to those "fine days of Castiglione."
Between July 29th and August 12th the French army took 15,000
prisoners, 70 guns, and wounded or killed 25,000, with little more
than half the forces of the Austrians. Bonaparte gives his losses at
7000, exclusive of the 15,000 sick he has in hospital; from July 31st
to August 6th he never changed his boots, or lay down in a bed.
Nevertheless, Jomini thinks that he showed less vigour in the
execution of his plans than in the earlier part of the campaign; but,
as an opinion _per contra_, we may note that the French grenadiers
made their "little Corporal" _Sergeant_ at Castiglione. Doubtless the
proximity of his wife at the commencement (July 31st) made him more
careful, and therefore less intrepid. On August 18th he wrote
Kellermann with an urgent request for troops. On August 17th Colonel
Graham, after hinting at the frightful excesses committed by the
Austrians in their retreat, adds in a postscript--"From generals to
subalterns the universal language of the army is that we must make
peace, as we do not know how to make war."[46]

On August 13th Bonaparte sent to the Directory his opinion of most of
his generals, in order to show that he required some better ones. Some
of his criticisms are interesting:--

  Berthier--"Talents, activity, courage, character; he has them
  all."

  Augereau--"Much character, courage, firmness, activity; is

  accustomed to war, beloved by the soldiers, lucky in his
  operations."

  Massena--"Active, indefatigable, has boldness, grasp, and
  promptitude in making his decisions."

  Serrurier--"Fights like a soldier, takes no responsibility;
  determined, has not much opinion of his troops, is often ailing."

  Despinois--"Flabby, inactive, slack, has not the genius for war,
  is not liked by the soldiers, does not fight with his head; has
  nevertheless good, sound political principles: would do well to
  command in the interior."

  Sauret--"A good, very good soldier, not sufficiently enlightened
  to be a general; unlucky."

Of eight more he has little good to say, but the Directory in
acknowledging his letter of August 23rd remarks that he has forgotten
several officers, and especially the Irish general Kilmaine.

About the same time Colonel Graham (Lord Lynedoch) was writing to the
British Government from Trent that the Austrians, despite their
defeats, were "undoubtedly brave fine troops, and an able chief would
put all to rights in a little time."[47] On August 18th he adds--"When
the wonderful activity, energy, and attention that prevail in the
French service, from the commander-in-chief downward, are compared to
the indecision, indifference, and indolence universal here, the
success of their rash but skilful manoeuvres is not surprising."


No. 7.

_Brescia._--Napoleon was here on July 27th, meeting Josephine about
the date arranged (July 25th), and she returned with him. On July 29th
they were nearly captured by an Austrian ambuscade near Ceronione, and
Josephine wept with fright. "Wurmser," said Napoleon, embracing her,
"shall pay dearly for those tears." She accompanies him to Castel
Nova, and sees a skirmish at Verona; but the sight of wounded men
makes her leave the army, and, finding it impossible to reach Brescia,
she flees _viâ_ Ferrara and Bologna to Lucca. She leaves the French
army in dire straits and awaits news anxiously, while the Senate of
Lucca presents her with the oil kept exclusively for royalty. Thence
she goes _viâ_ Florence to Milan. By August 7th the Austrian army was
broken and in full retreat, and Bonaparte conducts his correspondence
from Brescia from August 11th to 18th. On the 25th he is at Milan,
where he meets his wife after her long pilgrimage, and spends four
days. By August 30th he is again at Brescia, and reminds her that he
left her "vexed, annoyed, and not well." From a letter to her aunt,
Madame de Renaudin, at this time, quoted by Aubenas, we can see her
real feelings: "I am fêted wherever I go; all the princes of Italy
give me fêtes, even the Grand Duke of Tuscany, brother of the Emperor.
Ah, well, I prefer being a private individual in France. I care not
for honours bestowed in this country. I get sadly bored. My health has
undoubtedly a great deal to do with making me unhappy; I am often out
of sorts. If happiness could assure health, I ought to be in the best
of health. I have the most amiable husband imaginable. I have no time
to long for anything. My wishes are his. He is all day long in
adoration before me, as if I were a divinity; there could not possibly
be a better husband. M. Serbelloni will tell you how he loves me. He
often writes to my children; he loves them dearly. He is sending
Hortense, by M. Serbelloni, a lovely repeater, jewelled and enamelled;
to Eugène a splendid gold watch."


No. 9.

"_I hope we shall get into Trent by the 5th._"--He entered the city on
that day. In his pursuit of Wurmser, he and his army cover sixty miles
in two days, through the terrific Val Saguna and Brenta gorges,
brushing aside opposition by the way.


No. 12.

"_One of these nights the doors will be burst open with a
bang._"--Apparently within two or three days, for Bonaparte is at
Milan on September 21st, and stays with his wife till October 12th.
On October 1st he writes to the Directory that his total forces are
only 27,900; and that the Austrians, within six weeks, will have
50,000. He asks for 26,000 more men to end the war satisfactorily: "If
the preservation of Italy is dear to you, citizen directors, send me
help." On the 8th they reply with the promise of 10,000 to 12,000, to
which he replies (October 11th) that if 10,000 have started only 5000
will reach him. The Directory at this time are very poverty stricken,
and ask him once more to pay Kellermann's Army of the Alps, as being
"to some extent part of that which you command." This must have been
"nuts and wine" for the general who was to have been superseded by
Kellermann a few months earlier. On October 1st they advise him that
Wurmser's name is on the list of emigrants, and that if the Marshal
will surrender Mantua at once he need not be sent to Paris for trial.
If, however, Bonaparte thinks that this knowledge will make the old
Marshal more desperate, he is not to be told. Bonaparte, of course,
does not send the message. For some time these letters had been signed
by the President Lareveillère Lépeaux, but on September 19th there was
a charming letter from Carnot: "Although accustomed to unprecedented
deeds on your part, our hopes have been surpassed by the victory of
Bassano. What glory is yours, immortal Bonaparte! Moreau was about to
effect a juncture with you when that wretched _reculade_ of Jourdan
upset all our plans. Do not forget that immediately the armies go into
winter quarters on the Rhine the Austrians will have forces available
to help Wurmser." At Milan Bonaparte advises the Directory that he is
dealing with unpunished "fripponeries" in the commissariat department.
Here he receives from young Kellermann, afterwards the hero of
Marengo, a _précis_ of the condition of the Brescia fever-hospitals,
dated October 6th: "A wretched mattress, dirty and full of vermin, a
coarse sheet to each bed, rarely washed, no counterpanes, much
dilatoriness, such is the spectacle that the fever-hospitals of
Brescia present; it is heart-rending. The soldiers justly complain
that, having conquered opulent Italy at the cost of their life-blood,
they might, without enjoying comforts, at least find the help and
attention which their situation demands. Bread and rice are the only
passable foods, but the meat is hard. I beg that the general-in-chief
will immediately give attention to his companions in glory, who wish
for restored health only that they may gather fresh laurels." Thus
Bonaparte had his Bloemfontein, and perhaps his Burdett-Coutts.

On October 12th he tells the Directory that Mantua will not fall till
February--the exact date of its capitulation. One is tempted to wonder
if Napoleon was human enough to have inserted one little paragraph of
his despatch of October 12th from Milan with one eye on its perusal by
his wife, as it contains a veiled sneer at Hoche's exploits: "Send me
rather generals of brigade than generals of division. All that comes
to us from La Vendée is unaccustomed to war on a large scale; we have
the same reproach against the troops, but they are well-hardened." On
the same day he shows them that all the marvels of his six months'
campaign have cost the French Government only £440,000 (eleven million
francs). He pleads, however, for special auditors to have charge of
the accounts. Napoleon had not only made war support war, but had sent
twenty million francs requisitioned in Italy to the Republic. On
October 12th he leaves Milan for Modena, where he remains from the
14th to the 18th, is at Bologna on the 19th, and Ferrara from the 19th
to the 22nd, reaching Verona on the 24th.

Jomini has well pointed out that Napoleon's conception of making two
or three large Italian republics in place of many small ones minimised
the power of the Pope, and also that of Austria, by abolishing its
feudal rigours.

By this time Bonaparte is heartily sick of the war. On October 2nd he
writes direct to the Emperor of Germany: "Europe wants peace. This
disastrous war has lasted too long;" and on the 16th to Marshal
Wurmser: "The siege of Mantua, sir, is more disastrous than two
campaigns." His weariness is tempered with policy, as Alvinzi was _en
route_, and the French reinforcements had not arrived, not even the
10,000 promised in May.


No. 13.

"_Corsica is ours._"--At St. Helena he told his generals, "The King of
England wore the Corsican crown only two years. This whim cost the
British treasury five millions sterling. John Bull's riches could not
have been worse employed." He writes to the Directory on the same day:
"The expulsion of the English from the Mediterranean has considerable
influence on the success of our military operations in Italy. We can
exact more onerous conditions from Naples, which will have the
greatest moral effect on the minds of the Italians, assures our
communications, and makes Naples tremble as far as Sicily." On October
25th he writes: "Wurmser is at his last gasp; he is short of wine,
meat, and forage; he is eating his horses, and has 15,000 sick. In
fifty days Mantua will either be taken or delivered."


No. 14.

_Verona._--Bonaparte had made a long stay at Verona, to November 4th,
waiting reinforcements which never came. On November 5th he writes to
the Directory: "All the troops of the Directory arrive post-haste at
an alarming rate, and we--we are left to ourselves. Fine promises and
a few driblets of men are all we have received;" and on November 13th
he writes again: "Perchance we are on the eve of losing Italy. None of
the expected reinforcements have arrived.... I am doing my duty, the
officers and men are doing theirs; my heart is breaking, but my
conscience is at rest. Help--send me help!... I despair of preventing
the relief of Mantua, which in a week would have been ours. The
wounded are the pick of the army; all our superior officers, all our
picked generals are _hors de combat_; those who have come to me are so
incompetent, and they have not the soldiers' confidence. The army of
Italy, reduced to a handful of men, is exhausted. The heroes of Lodi,
Millesimo, Castiglione, and Bassano have died for their country, or
are in hospital;[48] to the corps remain only their reputation and
their glory. Joubert, Lannes, Lanusse, Victor, Murat, Chabot, Dupuy,
Rampon, Pijon, Menard, Chabran, and St. Hilaire are wounded.... In a
few days we shall make a last effort. Had I received the 83rd, 3500
strong, and of good repute in the army, I would have answered for
everything. Perhaps in a few days 40,000 will not suffice." The reason
for this unwonted pessimism was the state of his troops. His brother
Louis reported that Vaubois' men had no shoes and were almost naked,
in the midst of snow and mountains; that desertions were taking place
of soldiers with bare and bleeding feet, who told the enemy the plans
and conditions of their army. Finally Vaubois bungles, through not
knowing the ground, and is put under the orders of Massena, while two
of his half-brigades are severely censured by Napoleon in person for
their cowardice.


No. 15.

"_Once more I breathe freely._"--Thrice had Napoleon been foiled, as
much by the weather and his shoeless soldiers as by numbers (40,000
Austrians to his 28,000), and his position was well-nigh hopeless on
November 14th. He trusts Verona to 3000 men, and the blockade of
Mantua to Kilmaine, and the defence of Rivoli to Vaubois--the weakest
link in the chain--and determines to manoeuvre by the Lower Adige upon
the Austrian communications. He gets forty-eight hours' start, and
wins Arcola; in 1814 he deserved equal success, but bad luck and
treachery turned the scale. The battle of Arcola lasted seventy-two
hours, and for forty-eight hours was in favour of the Austrians.
Pending the arrival of the promised reinforcements, the battle was
bought too dear, and weakened Bonaparte more than the Austrians, who
received new troops almost daily. He replaced Vaubois by Joubert.


No. 18.

"_The 29th._"--But he is at Milan from November 27th to December 16th.
Most people know, from some print or other, the picture by Gros of
Bonaparte, flag in hand, leading his men across the murderous bridge
of Arcola. It was during this visit to Milan that his portrait was
taken, and Lavalette has preserved for us the domestic rather than the
dignified manner of the sitting accorded. He refused to give a fixed
time, and the artist was in despair, until Josephine came to his aid
by taking her husband on her knees every morning after breakfast, and
keeping him there a short time. Lavalette assisted at three of these
sittings--apparently to remove the bashful embarrassment of the young
painter. St. Amand suggests that Gros taking the portrait of Bonaparte
at Milan, just after Arcola, would, especially under such novel
conditions, prove a fitting theme for our artists to-day! From
December 16th to 21st Bonaparte is at Verona, whence he returns to
Milan. There is perhaps a veiled innuendo in Barras' letter of
December 30th. Clarke had advised the Directory that Alvinzi was
planning an attack, which Barras mentions, but adds: "Your return to
Milan shows that you consider another attack in favour of Wurmser
unlikely, or, at least, not imminent." He is at Milan till January
7th, whence he goes to Bologna, the city which, he says, "of all the
Italian cities has constantly shown the greatest energy and the most
considerable share of real information."


No. 20.

_General Brune._--This incident fixes the date of this letter to be 23
_Nivôse_ (January 12), and not 23 _Messidor_ (July 11), as hitherto
published in the French editions of this letter. On January 12, 1797,
he wrote General Clarke from Verona (No. 1375 of the _Correspondence_)
almost an exact duplicate of this letter--a very rare coincidence in
the epistles of Napoleon. "Scarcely set out from Roverbella, I learnt
that the enemy had appeared at Verona. Massena made his dispositions,
which have been very successful; we have made 600 prisoners, and we
have taken three pieces of cannon. General Brune has had seven bullets
in his clothes, without having been touched by one of them; this is
what it is to be lucky. We have had only ten men killed, and a hundred
wounded." Bonaparte had left Bologna on January 10, reaching Verona
_viâ_ Roverbella on the 12th.


No. 21.

_February 3rd._--"_I wrote you this morning._"--This and probably
other letters describing Rivoli, La Favorite, and the imminent fall
of Mantua, are missing. In summing up the campaign Thiers declares
that in ten months 55,000 French (all told, including reinforcements)
had beaten more than 200,000 Austrians, taken 80,000 of them
prisoners, killed and wounded 20,000. They had fought twelve pitched
battles, and sixty actions. These figures are probably as much above
the mark as those of Napoleon's detractors are below it.

One does not know which to admire most, Bonaparte's absence from
Marshal Wurmser's humiliation, or his abstention from entering Rome as
a conqueror. The first was the act of a perfect gentleman, worthy of
the best traditions of chivalry, the second was the very quintessence
of far-seeing sagacity, not "baulking the end half-won, for an instant
dole of praise." As he told Mdme. de Rémusat at Passeriano, "I
conquered the Pope better by not going to Rome than if I had burnt his
capital." Scott has compared his treatment of Wurmser to that of the
Black Prince with his royal prisoner, King John of France. Wurmser was
an Alsatian on the list of _émigrés_, and Bonaparte gave the Marshal
his life by sending him back to Austria, a fact which Wurmser requited
by warning Bonaparte of a conspiracy to poison him[49] in Romagna,
which Napoleon thinks would otherwise have been successful.


No. 24.

"_Perhaps I shall make peace with the Pope._"--On February 12th the
Pope had written to "his dear son, General Bonaparte," to depute
plenipotentiaries for a peace, and ends by assuring him "of our
highest esteem," and concluding with the paternal apostolic
benediction. Meanwhile Napoleon, instead of sacking Faenza, has just
invoked the monks and priests to follow the precepts of the Gospel.


No. 25.

"_The unlimited power you hold over me._"--There seems no question
that during the Italian campaigns he was absolutely faithful to
Josephine, although there was scarcely a beauty in Milan who did not
aspire to please him and to conquer him. In his fidelity there was,
says St. Amand, much love and a little calculation. As Napoleon has
said himself, his position was delicate in the extreme; he commanded
old generals; every one of his movements was jealously watched; his
circumspection was extreme. His fortune lay in his wisdom. He would
have to forget himself for one hour, and how many of his victories
depended upon no more! The celebrated singer, La Grassini, who had all
Italy at her feet, cared only for the young general who would not at
that time vouchsafe her a glance.


FOOTNOTES

  [45] Murat, says Marmont, who hated him, was the culprit here.

  [46] J. H. Rose in _Eng. Hist. Review_, January 1899.

  [47] See Essay by J. H. Rose in _Eng. Hist. Review_, January 1899.

  [48] With fevers caught in the rice-swamps of Lombardy.

  [49] With aqua tofana, says Marmont.




SERIES C

_THE CAMPAIGN OF MARENGO_, 1800


Elected to the joint consulate by the events of the 18th _Brumaire_
(November 9), 1799, Napoleon spent the first Christmas Day after his
return from Egypt in writing personal letters to the King of England
and Emperor of Austria, with a view to peace. He asks King George how
it is that the two most enlightened nations of Europe do not realise
that peace is the chief need as well as the chief glory ... and
concludes by asserting that the fate of all civilised nations is bound
up in the conclusion of a war "which embraces the entire world." His
efforts fail in both cases. On December 27th he makes the _Moniteur_
the sole official journal. On February 7th, 1800, he orders ten days'
military mourning for the death of Washington--that "great man who,
like the French, had fought for equality and liberty." On April 22nd
he urges Moreau to begin his campaign with the army of the Rhine, an
order reiterated on April 24th through Carnot, again made Minister of
War. A diversion to save the army of Italy was now imperative. On May
5th he congratulated Moreau on the battle of Stockach, but informs him
that Massena's position is critical, shut up in Genoa, and with food
only till May 25th. He advises Massena the same day that he leaves
Paris that night to join the Army of Reserve, that the cherished
child of victory must hold out as long as possible, at least until May
30th. At Geneva he met M. Necker. On May 14th he writes General
Mortier, commandant of Paris, to keep that city quiet, as he will have
still to be away a few days longer, which he trusts "will not be
indifferent to M. de Mélas."


No. 3.

This letter was written from Ivrea, May 29th, 1800. On the 30th
Napoleon is at Vercelli, on June 1st at Novara, and on June 2nd in
Milan. Eugène served under Murat at the passage of the Ticino, May
31st.

_M.'s_; probably "Maman," _i.e._ his mother.

_Cherries._--This fruit had already tender associations. Las Cases
tells us that when Napoleon was only sixteen he met at Valence
Mademoiselle du Colombier, who was not insensible to his merits. It
was the first love of both.... "We were the most innocent creatures
imaginable," the Emperor used to say; "we contrived little meetings
together. I well remember one which took place on a midsummer morning,
just as daylight began to dawn. It will scarcely be believed that all
our happiness consisted in eating cherries together" (vol. i. 81,
1836).


No. 4.

_Milan._--He arrived here on June 2nd, and met with a great reception.
In his bulletin of June 5th we find him assisting at an improvised
concert. It ends, somewhat quaintly for a bulletin, as follows:
"Italian music has a charm ever new. The celebrated singers,
Billington,[50] La Grassini, and Marchesi are expected at Milan. They
say they are about to start for Paris to give concerts there."
According to M. Frédéric Masson, this Paris visit masked ulterior
motives, and was arranged at a _déjeûner_ on the same day, where La
Grassini, Napoleon, and Berthier breakfasted together. Henceforward to
Marengo Napoleon spends every spare day listening to the marvellous
songstress, and as at Eylau, seven years later, runs great risks by
admitting Venus into the camp of Mars. At St. Helena he declares that
from June 3rd to 8th he was busy "receiving deputations, and showing
himself to people assembled from all parts of Lombardy to see their
liberator." The Austrians had declared that he had died in Egypt. The
date of No. 4 should probably be June 9th, on which day the rain was
very heavy. He reached Stradella the next day.


FOOTNOTES

  [50] On reaching London a few months later Mistress Billington was
       engaged simultaneously by Drury Lane and Covent Garden, and
       during the following year harvested £10,000 from these two
       engagements.




SERIES D


No. 1.

The date is doubtless 27 _Messidor_ (July 16), and the fête alluded to
that of July 14. The following day Napoleon signed the Concordat with
the Pope, which paved the way for the restoration of the Roman
Catholic religion in France (September 11).

_The blister._--On July 7 he quaintly writes Talleyrand: "They have
put a second blister on my arm, which prevented me giving audience
yesterday. Time of sickness is an opportune moment for coming to terms
with the priests."

_Some plants._--No trait in Josephine's character is more characteristic
than her love of flowers--not the selfish love of a mere collector,[51]
but the bountiful joy of one who wishes to share her treasures.
Malmaison had become the "veritable Jardin des Plantes" of the
epoch,[52] far better than its Paris namesake in those days. The
splendid hothouses, constructed by M. Thibaut, had been modelled on
those of Kew, and enabled Josephine to collect exotics from every
clime, and especially from her beloved Martinique. No jewel was so
precious to her as a rare and beautiful flower. The Minister of
Marine never forgot to instruct the deep-sea captains to bring back
floral tributes from the far-off tropics. These often fell, together
with the ships, into the hands of the British sea-dogs, but the
Prince Regent always had them sent on from London, and thus
rendered, says Aubenas, "the gallant homage of a courtly enemy to the
charming tastes and to the popularity already acquired by this
universally beloved woman." Her curator, M. Aimé Bonpland, was an
accomplished naturalist, who had been with Humboldt in America, and
brought thence 6000 new plants. On his return in 1804 he was nominated
by Josephine manager of the gardens of Malmaison and Navarre.

In the splendid work, _Le Jardin de la Malmaison_, in three volumes,
are plates, with descriptions of 184 plants, mostly new, collected
there from Egypt, Arabia, the United States, the Antilles, Mexico,
Madeira, the Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius, the East Indies, New
Caledonia, Australia, and China. To Josephine we owe the Camellia, and
the Catalpa, from the flora of Peru, whilst her maiden name (La
Pagerie) was perpetuated by Messrs. Pavon and Ruiz in the Lapageria.

_If the weather is as bad._--As we shall see later, Bourrienne was
invaluable to Josephine's court for his histrionic powers, and he
seems to have been a prime favourite. On the present occasion he
received the following "Account of the Journey to Plombières. To the
Inhabitants of Malmaison,"--probably the work of Count Rapp, touched
up by Hortense (Bourrienne's _Napoleon_, vol. ii. 85. Bentley,
1836):--

"The whole party left Malmaison in tears, which brought on such
dreadful headaches that all the amiable company were quite overcome by
the idea of the journey. Madame Bonaparte, mère, supported the
fatigues of this memorable day with the greatest courage; but Madame
Bonaparte, consulesse, did not show any. The two young ladies who sat
in the dormeuse, Mademoiselle Hortense and Madame Lavalette, were
rival candidates for a bottle of Eau de Cologne; and every now and
then the amiable M. Rapp made the carriage stop for the comfort of his
poor little sick heart, which overflowed with bile; in fact, he was
obliged to take to bed on arriving at Epernay, while the rest of the
amiable party tried to drown their sorrows in champagne. The second
day was more fortunate on the score of health and spirits, but
provisions were wanting, and great were the sufferings of the stomach.
The travellers lived on in the hope of a good supper at Toul, but
despair was at its height when on arriving there they found only a
wretched inn, and nothing in it. We saw some odd-looking folks there,
which indemnified us a little for spinach dressed with lamp-oil, and
red asparagus fried with curdled milk. Who would not have been amused
to see the Malmaison gourmands seated at a table so shockingly
served!

"In no record of history is there to be found a day passed in distress
so dreadful as that on which we arrived at Plombières. On departing
from Toul we intended to breakfast at Nancy, for every stomach had
been empty for two days, but the civil and military authorities came
out to meet us, and prevented us from executing our plan. We continued
our route, wasting away, so that you might see us growing thinner
every moment. To complete our misfortune, the dormeuse, which seemed
to have taken a fancy to embark on the Moselle for Metz, barely
escaped an overturn. But at Plombières we have been well compensated
for this unlucky journey, for on our arrival we were received with all
kinds of rejoicings. The town was illuminated, the cannon fired, and
the faces of handsome women at all the windows gave us reason to hope
that we shall bear our absence from Malmaison with the less regret.

"With the exception of some anecdotes, which we reserve for chit-chat
on our return, you have here a correct account of our journey, which
we, the undersigned, hereby certify.

  "JOSEPHINE BONAPARTE.
  BEAUHARNAIS LAVALETTE.
  HORTENSE BEAUHARNAIS.
  RAPP.
  BONAPARTE, MÈRE.

"The company ask pardon for the blots."

  _"21 Messidor (July 10)._

"It is requested that the person who receives this journal will show
it to all who take an interest in the fair travellers."

At this time Hortense was madly in love with Napoleon's favourite
general, Duroc, who, however, loved his master more, and preferred not
to interfere with his projects, especially as a marriage with Hortense
would mean separation from Napoleon. Hortense and Bourrienne were both
excellent billiard players, and the latter used this opportunity to
carry letters from Hortense to her lukewarm lover.

_Malmaison, without you, is too dreary._--Although Madame la Grassini
had been specially summoned to sing at the Fête de la Concorde the day
before.


No. 2.

This is the third pilgrimage Josephine has made, under the doctor's
orders, to Plombières; but the longed-for heir will have to be sought
for elsewhere, by fair means or foul. Lucien, who as Spanish
Ambassador had vainly spent the previous year in arranging the divorce
and remarriage of Napoleon to a daughter of the King of Spain,
suggests adultery at Plombières, or a "warming-pan conspiracy," as the
last alternatives.[53] Josephine complains to Napoleon of his
brother's "poisonous" suggestions, and Lucien is again disgraced. In a
few months an heir is found in Hortense's first-born, Napoleon
Charles, born October 10.

_The fat Eugène_ had come partly to be near his sister in her mother's
absence, and partly to receive his colonelcy. Josephine is wretched to
be absent, and writes to Hortense (June 16):--"I am utterly wretched,
my dear Hortense, to be separated from you, and my mind is as sick as
my body. I feel that I was not born, my dear child, for so much
grandeur.... By now Eugène should be with you; that thought consoles
me." Aubenas has found in the Tascher archives a charming letter from
Josephine to her mother in Martinique, announcing how soon she may
hope to find herself a great-grandmother.


No. 3.

_Your letter has come._--Possibly the one to Hortense quoted above, as
Josephine was not fond of writing many letters.

_Injured whilst shooting a boar._--Constant was not aware of this
occurrence, and was therefore somewhat incredulous of Las Cases
(vol. i. 289). The account in the "Memorial of St. Helena" is as
follows:--"Another time, while hunting the wild boar at Marly, all his
suite were put to flight; it was like the rout of an army. The
Emperor, with Soult and Berthier,[54] maintained their ground against
three enormous boars. 'We killed all three, but I received a hurt
from my adversary, and nearly lost this finger,' said the Emperor,
pointing to the third finger of his left hand, which indeed bore the
mark of a severe wound. 'But the most laughable circumstance of all
was to see the multitude of men, surrounded by their dogs, screening
themselves behind the three heroes, and calling out lustily "Save the
Emperor![55] save the Emperor!" while not one advanced to my
assistance'" (vol. ii. 202. Colburn, 1836).

"_The Barber of Seville._"--This was their best piece, and spectators
(except Lucien) agree that in it the little theatre at Malmaison and
its actors were unsurpassed in Paris. Bourrienne as Bartholo, Hortense
as Rosina, carried off the palm. According to the Duchesse d'Abrantès,
Wednesday was the usual day of representation, when the First Consul
was wont to ask forty persons to dinner, and a hundred and fifty for
the evening. As the Duchess had reason to know, Bonaparte was the
severest of critics. "Lauriston made a noble lover," says the
Duchess--"rather heavy" being Bourrienne's more professional comment.
Eugène, says Méneval, excelled in footman's parts.[56] Michot, from
the Theatre Français, was stage manager; and Bonaparte provided what
Constant has called "the Malmaison Troupe," with their dresses and a
collection of dramas. He was always spurring them on to more ambitious
flights, and by complimenting Bourrienne on his prodigious memory,
would stimulate him to learn the longest parts. Lucien, who refused to
act, declares that Bonaparte quoted the saying of Louis XVI.
concerning Marie Antoinette and her company, that the performances
"were royally badly played." Junot, however, even in these days played
the part of a drunkard only too well (Jung, vol. ii. 256).


No. 4.

_The Sèvres Manufactory._--After his visit, he wrote Duroc: "This
morning I gave, in the form of gratuity, a week's wages to the workmen
of the Sèvres manufactory. Have the amount given to the director. It
should not exceed a thousand écus."


No. 5.

_Your lover, who is tired of being alone._--So much so that he got up
at five o'clock in the morning to read his letters in a young bride's
bed-chamber. The story is brightly told by the lady in question,
Madame d'Abrantès (vol. ii. ch. 19). A few days before the Marly hunt,
mentioned in No. 3, the young wife of seventeen, whom Bonaparte had
known from infancy, and whose mother (Madame Permon) he had wished to
marry, found the First Consul seated by her bedside with a thick
packet of letters, which he was carefully opening and making marginal
notes upon. At six he went off singing, pinching the lady's foot
through the bed-clothes as he went. The next day the same thing
happened, and the third day she locked herself in, and prevented her
maid from finding the key. In vain--the unwelcome visitor fetched a
master-key. As a last resource, she wheedled her husband, General
Junot, into breaking orders and spending the night with her; and the
next day (June 22) Bonaparte came in to proclaim the hunting morning,
but by her side found his old comrade of Toulon, fast asleep. The
latter dreamily but good-humouredly asked, "Why, General, what are you
doing in a lady's chamber at this hour?" and the former replied, "I
came to awake Madame Junot for the chase, but I find her provided with
an alarum still earlier than myself. I might scold, for you are
contraband here, M. Junot." He then withdrew, after offering Junot a
horse for the hunt. The husband jumped up, exclaiming, "Faith! that is
an amiable man! What goodness! Instead of scolding, instead of sending
me sneaking back to my duty in Paris! Confess, my Laura, that he is
not only an admirable being, but above the sphere of human nature."
Laura, however, was still dubious. Later in the day she was taken to
task by the First Consul, who was astounded when she told him that his
action might compromise her. "I shall never forget," she says,
"Napoleon's expression of countenance at this moment; it displayed a
rapid succession of emotions, none of them evil." Josephine heard of
the affair, and was jealous for some little time to come.

_General Ney._--Bonaparte had instructed Josephine to find him a nice
wife, and she had chosen Mlle. Aglaé-Louise Auguié, the intimate
friend and schoolfellow of Hortense, and daughter of a former
Receveur-Général des Finances. To the latter Ney goes fortified with a
charming letter from Josephine, dated May 30--the month which the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_ has erroneously given for that of the
marriage, which seems to have taken place at the end of July
(_Biographie Universelle, Michaud_, vol. xxx.). Napoleon (who stood
godfather to all the children of his generals) and Hortense were
sponsors for the firstborn of this union, Napoleon Joseph, born May 8,
1803. The Duchess d'Abrantès describes her first meeting with Madame
Ney at the Boulogne fête of August 15, 1802. Her simplicity and
timidity "were the more attractive inasmuch as they formed a contrast
to most of the ladies by whom she was surrounded at the court of
France.... The softness and benevolence of Madame Ney's smile,
together with the intelligent expression of her large dark eyes,
rendered her a very beautiful woman, and her lively manners and
accomplishments enhanced her personal graces" (vol. iii. 31). The
brave way in which she bore her husband's execution won the admiration
of Napoleon, who at St. Helena coupled her with Mdme. de Lavalette and
Mdme. Labedoyère.


FOOTNOTES

  [51] She was, however, no mere amateur, and knew, says Mlle.
       d'Avrillon, the names of all her plants, the family to which
       they belonged, their native soil, and special properties.

  [52] _Rueil, le château de Richelieu et la Malmaison_, by Jacquin and
       Duesberg, p. 130; in Aubenas' _Joséphine_, vol. i.

  [53] Lucien declares that Napoleon said to his wife, in his presence
       and that of Joseph, "Imitate Livia, and you will find me
       Augustus."--(Jung, vol. ii. 206.) Lucien evidently suspects an
       occult sinister allusion here, but Napoleon is only alluding to
       the succession devolving on the first child of their joint
       families. Lucien refused Hortense, but Louis was more amenable
       to his brother's wishes. On her triumphal entry into Mühlberg
       (November 1805), the Empress reads on a column a hundred feet
       high--"Josephinae, Galliarum Augustae."

  [54] Made Grand Huntsman in 1804.

  [55] An anachronism; he was at this time First Consul.

  [56] An euphuistic way of saying he could not learn longer ones. In
       war time Napoleon had to insist on Eugène keeping his letters
       with him and constantly re-reading them.




SERIES E


No. 1.

_Madame._--Napoleon became Emperor on May 18th, and this was the first
letter to his wife since Imperial etiquette had become _de rigueur_,
and the first letter to Josephine signed Napoleon. Méneval gives a
somewhat amusing description of the fine gradations of instructions he
received on this head from his master. This would seem to be a reason
for this uncommon form of salutation; but, _per contra_, Las Cases
(vol. i. 276) mentions some so-called letters beginning _Madame et
chère épouse_, which Napoleon declares to be spurious.

_Pont de Bricques_, a little village about a mile from Boulogne. On
his first visit to the latter he was met by a deputation of farmers,
of whom one read out the following address: "General, here we are,
twenty farmers, and we offer you a score of big, sturdy lads, who are,
and always shall be, at your service. Take them along with you,
General; they will help you to give England a good thrashing. As for
ourselves, we have another duty to fulfil: with our arms we will till
the ground, so that bread be not wanting to the brave fellows who are
destined to destroy the English." Napoleon thanked the honest yeomen,
and determined to make the only habitable dwelling there his
headquarters. The place is called from the foundations of bricks found
there--the remains of one of Cæsar's camps.

_The wind having considerably freshened._--Constant tells a good story
of the Emperor's obstinacy, but also of his bravery, a few days later.
Napoleon had ordered a review of his ships, which Admiral Bruix had
ignored, seeing a storm imminent. Napoleon sends off Bruix to Holland
in disgrace, and orders the review to take place; but when, amid the
wild storm, he sees "more than twenty gunboats run aground," and no
succour vouchsafed to the drowning men, he springs into the nearest
lifeboat, crying, "We must save them somehow." A wave breaks over the
boat; he is drenched and nearly carried overboard, losing the hat he
had worn at Marengo. Such pluck begets enthusiasm; but, in spite of
all they could do, two hundred lives were lost. This is Constant's
version; probably his loss is exaggerated. The Emperor, writing
Talleyrand on August 1st, speaks only of three or four ships lost, and
"une quinzaine d'hommes."


No. 2.

_The waters._--Mlle. d'Avrillon describes them and their effect--the
sulphur baths giving erysipelas to people in poor health. Corvisart
had accompanied the Empress, to superintend their effect, which was as
usual nil.

_All the vexations._--Constant (vol. i. 230, &c., 1896) is of use to
explain what these were--having obtained possession of a diary of the
tour by one of Josephine's ladies-in-waiting, which had fallen into
Napoleon's hands. In the first place, the roads (where there were
any[57]) were frightful, especially in the Ardennes forest, and the
diary for August 1st concludes by stating "that some of the carriages
were so battered that they had to be bound together with ropes. One
ought not to expect women to travel about like a lot of dragoons." The
writer of the diary, however, preferred to stay in the carriage, and
let Josephine and the rest get wet feet, thinking the risk she ran the
least. Another vexation to Josephine was the published report of her
gift to the Mayoress of Rheims of a malachite medallion set in
brilliants, and of her saying as she did so, "It is the colour of
Hope." Although she had really used this expression, it was the last
thing she would like to see in print, taking into consideration the
reason for her yearly peregrinations to Plombières, and now to Aix,
and their invariable inefficiency. Under the date August 14th, the
writer of the diary gives a severe criticism of Josephine. "She is
exactly like a ten-year-old child--good-natured, frivolous,
impressionable; in tears at one moment, and comforted the next.... She
has just wit enough not to be an utter idiot. Ignorant--as are most
Creoles--she has learned nothing, or next to nothing, except by
conversation; but, having passed her life in good society, she has got
good manners, grace, and a mastery of that sort of jargon which, in
society, sometimes passes for wit. Social events constitute the canvas
which she embroiders, which she arranges, and which give her a subject
for conversation. She is witty for quite a whole quarter of an hour
every day.... Her diffidence is charming ... her temper very sweet and
even; it is impossible not to be fond of her. I fear that ... this
need of unbosoming, of communicating all her thoughts and impressions,
of telling all that passes between herself and the Emperor, keeps the
latter from taking her into his confidence.... She told me this
morning that, during all the years she had spent with him, never once
had she seen him let himself go."

_Eugène has started for Blois_, where he became the head of the
electoral college of Loir et Cher, having just been made Colonel-General
of the Chasseurs by Napoleon. The Beauharnais family were originally
natives of Blois.


No. 3.

_Aix-la-Chapelle._--In this, the first Imperial pilgrimage to take the
waters, great preparations had been made, forty-seven horses bought at
an average cost of £60 apiece; and eight carriages, which are not dear
at £1000 for the lot, with £400 additional for harness and fittings.

At Aix they had fox-hunting and hare-coursing so called, but probably
the final tragedy was consummated with a gun. Lord Rosebery reminds us
that at St. Helena the Emperor actually shot a cow! They explored coal
mines, and examined all the local manufactories, including the relics
of Charlemagne--of which great warrior and statesman Josephine refused
an arm, as having a still more puissant one ever at hand for her
protection.

When tidings come that the Emperor will arrive on September 2, and
prolong their stay from Paris, there is general lamentation among
Josephine's womenkind, especially on the part of that perennial wet
blanket and busybody, Madame de Larochefoucauld, who will make herself
a still greater nuisance at Mayence two years later.


No. 4.

_During the past week._--As a matter of fact he only reached Ostend on
April 12th from Boulogne, having left Dunkirk on the 11th.

_The day after to-morrow._--This fête was the distribution of the
Legion of Honour at Boulogne and a review of 80,000 men. The
decorations were enshrined in the helmet of Bertrand du Guesclin,
which in its turn was supported on the shield of the Chevalier
Bayard.

_Hortense_ arrived at Boulogne, with her son, and the Prince and
Princess Murat, a few days later, and saw the Emperor. Josephine
received a letter from Hortense soon after Napoleon joined her
(September 2nd), to which she replied on September 8th. "The Emperor
has read your letter; he has been rather vexed not to hear from you
occasionally. He would not doubt your kind heart if he knew it as well
as I, but appearances are against you. Since he can think you are
neglecting him, lose no time in repairing the wrongs which are not
real," for "Bonaparte loves you like his own child, which adds much to
my affection for him."

_I am very well satisfied ... with the flotillas._--The descent upon
England was to have taken place in September, when the death of
Admiral Latouche-Tréville at Toulon, August 19th, altered all
Napoleon's plans. Just about this time also _Fulton_ submitted his
steamship invention to Bonaparte. The latter, however, had recently
been heavily mulcted in other valueless discoveries, and refers Fulton
to the savants of the Institute, who report it chimerical and
impracticable. The fate of England probably lay in the balance at this
moment, more than in 1588 or 1798.

Napoleon and Josephine leave Aix for Cologne on September 12, and it
is now the ladies' turn to institute a hunt--the "real chamois hunt";
for each country inn swarms with this pestilence that walketh in
darkness, and which, alas! is no respecter of persons.


No. 5.

Two points are noteworthy in this letter--(1) that like No. 1 of this
series (see note thereto) it commences _Madame and dear Wife_; and (2)
it is signed Bonaparte and not Napoleon, which somewhat militates
against its authenticity.

_Arras, August 29th._--Early on this day he had been at St. Cloud. On
the 30th he writes Cambacérès from Arras that he is "satisfied with
the spirit of this department." On the same day he writes thence to
the King of Prussia and Fouché. To his Minister of Police he writes:
"That detestable journal, _Le Citoyen français_, seems only to wish to
wallow in blood. For eight days running we have been entertained with
nothing but the Saint Bartholomew. Who on earth is the editor
(_rédacteur_) of this paper? With what gusto this wretch relishes the
crimes and misfortunes of our fathers! My intention is that you should
put a stop to it. Have the editor (_directeur_) of this paper changed,
or suppress it." On Friday he is at Mons (writing interesting letters
respecting the removal of church ruins), and reaches his wife on the
Sunday (September 2nd) as his letter foreshadowed.

_I am rather impatient to see you._--The past few months had been an
anxious time for Josephine. Talleyrand (who, having insulted her in
1799, thought her his enemy) was scheming for her divorce, and wished
Napoleon to marry the Princess Wilhelmina of Baden, and thus cement an
alliance with Bavaria and Russia (Constant, vol. i. 240). The
Bonaparte family were very anxious that Josephine should not be
crowned. Napoleon had too great a contempt for the weaknesses of
average human nature to expect much honesty from Talleyrand. But he
was not as yet case-hardened to ingratitude, and was always highly
sensitive to caricature and hostile criticism. Talleyrand had been the
main cause of the death of the Duc d'Enghien, and was now trying to
show that he had wished to prevent it; but possibly the crowning
offence was contained in a lady's diary, that fell into the emperor's
hands, where Talleyrand is said to have called his master "a regular
little Nero" in his system of espionage. The diary in question is in
Constant's "Memoirs," vol. i., and this letter helps to fix the error
in the dates, probably caused by confusion between the Revolutionary
and Gregorian Calendars.


No. 6.

_T._--This may be Talleyrand, whom Mdme. de Remusat in a letter to her
husband (September 21st) at Aix, hinted to be on bad terms with the
Emperor--a fact confirmed and explained by Méneval. It may also have
been Tallien, who returned to France in 1802, where he had been
divorced from his unfaithful wife.

_B._--Doubtlessly Bourrienne, who was in disgrace with Napoleon, and
who was always trying to impose on Josephine's good nature. No sooner
had Napoleon left for Boulogne on July 14th than his former secretary
inflicts himself on the wife at Malmaison.

Napoleon joins Josephine at St. Cloud on or before October 13th, where
preparations are already being made for the Coronation by the
Pope--the first ceremony of the kind for eight centuries.


FOOTNOTES

  [57] The Emperor had himself planned the Itinerary, and had mistaken a
       projected road for a completed one, between Rethel and Marche.




SERIES F


No. 1.

_To Josephine._--She was at Plombières from August 2 to September 10,
but no letter is available for the period, neither to Hortense nor
from Napoleon.

_Strasburg._--She is in the former Episcopal Palace, at the foot of
the cathedral.

_Stuttgard._--He is driven over from Ludwigsburg on October 4th, and
hears the German opera of "Don Juan."

_I am well placed._--On the same day Napoleon writes his brother
Joseph that he has already won two great victories--(1) by having no
sick or deserters, but many new conscripts; and (2) because the
Badenese army and those of Bavaria and Wurtemberg had joined him, and
all Germany well disposed.


No. 2.

_Louisburg._--Ludwigsburg.

_In a few days._--To Talleyrand he wrote from Strasburg on September
27: "Within a fortnight we shall see several things."

_A new bride._--This letter, in the collection of his Correspondence
ordered by Napoleon III., concludes at this point.

_Electress._--The Princess Charlotte-Auguste-Mathilde (1766-1828),
daughter of George III., our Princess Royal, who married Frederick I.
Napoleon says she is "not well treated by the Elector, to whom,
nevertheless, she seems much attached" (Brotonne, No. 111). She was
equally pleased with Napoleon, and wrote home how astonished she was
to find him so polite and agreeable a person.


No. 3.

_I have assisted at a marriage._--The bride was the Princess of
Saxe-Hildburghhausen, who was marrying the second son of the Elector.


No. 5.

Written at Augsburg. On October 15th he reaches the abbey of
Elchingen, which is situated on a height, from whence a wide view is
obtained, and establishes his headquarters there.


No. 6.

_Spent the whole of to-day indoors._--This is also mentioned in his
Seventh Bulletin (dated the same day), which adds, "But repose is not
compatible with the direction of this immense army."

_Vicenza._--Massena did not, however, reach this place till November
3rd. The French editions have _Vienna_, but _Vicenza_ is evidently
meant.


No. 7.

He is still at Elchingen, but at Augsburg the next day. On the 21st he
issues a decree to his army that Vendémiaire,[58] of which this was
the last day but one, should be counted as a campaign for pensions and
military services.

_Elchingen._--Méneval speaks of this village "rising in an amphitheatre
above the Danube, surrounded by walled gardens, and houses rising one
above the other." From it Napoleon saw the city of Ulm below,
commanded by his cannon. Marshal Ney won his title of Duke of Elchingen
by capturing it on October 14th, and fully deserved it. The Emperor
used to leave the abbey every morning to go to the camp before Ulm,
where he used to spend the day, and sometimes the night. The rain
was so heavy that, until a plank was found, Napoleon sat in a tent
with his feet in water (Savary, vol. ii. 196).

_Such a catastrophe._--At Ulm General Mack, with eight field-marshals,
seven lieutenant-generals, and 33,000 men surrender. Napoleon had
despised Mack even in 1800, when he told Bourrienne at Malmaison,
"Mack is a man of the lowest mediocrity I ever saw in my life; he is
full of self-sufficiency and conceit, and believes himself equal to
anything. He has no talent. I should like to see him some day opposed
to one of our good generals; we should then see fine work. He is a
boaster, and that is all. He is really one of the most silly men
existing, and besides all that, he is unlucky" (vol. i. 304). Napoleon
stipulated for Mack's life in one of the articles of the Treaty of
Presburg.


No. 9.

_Munich._--Napoleon arrived here on October 24th.

_Lemarois._--A trusty aide-de-camp, who had witnessed Napoleon's civil
marriage in March 1796, at 10 P.M.

_I was grieved._--They had no news from October 12th to 21st in Paris,
where they learnt daily that Strasburg was in the same predicament.
Mdme. de Rémusat, at Paris, was equally anxious, and such women, in
the Emperor's absence, tended by their presence or even by their
correspondence to increase the alarms of Josephine.

_Amuse yourself._--M. Masson (_Josephine, Impératrice et Reine_, p.
424) has an interesting note of how she used to attend lodge at the
Orient in Strasburg, to preside at a "loge d'adoption sous la
direction de Madame de Dietrich, grand maîtresse titulaire."

_Talleyrand has come._--He was urgently needed to help in the
correspondence with the King of Prussia (concerning the French
violation of his Anspach territory), with whom Napoleon's relations
were becoming more strained.


No. 10.

_We are always in forests._--Baron Lejeune, with his artist's eye,
describes his impressions of the Amstetten forest as he travelled
through it with Murat the following morning (November 4th). "Those
of us who came from the south of Europe had never before realised
how beautiful Nature can be in the winter. In this particular
instance everything was robed in the most gleaming attire; the
silvery rime softening the rich colours of the decaying oak leaves,
and the sombre vegetation of the pines. The frozen drapery, combined
with the mist, in which everything was more or less enveloped, gave
a soft, mysterious charm to the surrounding objects, producing a
most beautiful picture. Lit up by the sunshine, thousands of long
icicles, such as those which sometimes droop from our fountains and
water-wheels, hung like shining lustres from the trees. Never did
ball-room shine with so many diamonds; the long branches of the
oaks, pines, and other forest trees were weighed down by the
masses of hoar-frost, while the snow converted their summits into
rounded roofs, forming beneath them grottoes resembling those of the
Pyrenean mountains, with their shining stalactites and graceful
columns" (vol. i. 24).

_My enemies._--Later in the day Napoleon writes from Lambach to the
Emperor of Austria a pacific letter, which contains the paragraph, "My
ambition is wholly concentrated on the re-establishment of my commerce
and of my marine, and England grievously opposes itself to both."


No. 11.

Written from Lintz, the capital of Upper Austria, where Napoleon was
on the 4th.

No. 12.

Napoleon took up his abode at the palace of Schoenbrunn on the 14th,
and proves his "two-o'clock-in-the-morning courage" by passing through
Vienna at that time the following morning.


No. 13.

_They owe everything to you._--Aubenas quotes this, and remarks (vol.
ii. 326): "No one had pride in France more than Napoleon, stronger
even than his conviction of her superiority in the presence of other
contemporary sovereigns and courts. He wishes that in Germany, where
she will meet families with all the pride and sometimes all the
haughtiness of their ancestry, Josephine will not forget that she is
Empress of the French, superior to those who are about to receive her,
and who owe full respect and homage to her."


No. 14.

_Austerlitz._--Never was a victory more needful; but never was the
Emperor more confident. Savary says that it would take a volume to
contain all that emanated from his mind during that twenty-four hours
(December 1-2). Nor was it confined to military considerations.
General Ségur describes how he spent his evening meal with his
marshals, discussing with Junot the last new tragedy (_Les Templiers_,
by Raynouard), and from it to Racine, Corneille, and the fatalism of
our ancestors.

_December 2nd_ was a veritable Black Monday for the Coalition in
general, and for Russia in particular, where Monday is always looked
upon as an unlucky day. Their forebodings increased when, on the eve
of the battle, the Emperor Alexander was thrown from his horse
(Czartoriski, vol. ii. 106).


No. 17.

_A long time since I had news of you._--Josephine was always a bad
correspondent, but at this juncture was reading that stilted but
sensational romance--"Caleb Williams;" or hearing the "Achilles" of
Paër, or the "Romeo and Juliet" of Zingarelli in the intervals of her
imperial progress through Germany. M. Masson, not often too indulgent
to Josephine, thinks her conduct excusable at this period--paying and
receiving visits, dressing and redressing, always in gala costume, and
without a moment's solitude.


No. 19.

_I await events._--A phrase usually attributed to Talleyrand in
1815. However, the Treaty of Presburg was soon signed (December
2nd), and the same day Napoleon met the Archduke Charles at
Stamersdorf, a meeting arranged from mutual esteem. Napoleon had
an unswerving admiration for this past and future foe, and said to
Madame d'Abrantès, "That man has a soul, a golden heart."[59]
Napoleon, however, did not wish to discuss politics, and only
arranged for an interview of two hours, "one of which," he wrote
Talleyrand, "will be employed in dining, the other in talking war and
in mutual protestations."

_I, for my part, am sufficiently busy._--No part of Napoleon's career
is more wonderful than the way in which he conducts the affairs of
France and of Europe from a hostile capital. This was his first
experience of the kind, and perhaps the easiest, although Prussian
diplomacy had needed very delicate and astute handling. But when
Napoleon determined, without even consulting his wife, to cement
political alliances by matrimonial ones with his and her relatives, he
was treading on somewhat new and difficult ground. First and foremost,
he wanted a princess for his ideal young man, Josephine's son Eugène,
and he preferred Auguste, the daughter of the King of Bavaria, to the
offered Austrian Archduchess. But the young Hereditary Prince of Baden
was in love and accepted by his beautiful cousin Auguste; so, to
compensate him for his loss, the handsome and vivacious Stephanie
Beauharnais, fresh from Madame Campan's finishing touches, was sent
for. For his brother Jerome a bride is found by Napoleon in the
daughter of the King of Wurtemberg. Baden, Bavaria, and Wurtemberg
were too much indebted to France for the spoils they were getting from
Austria to object, provided the ladies and their mammas were
agreeable; but the conqueror of Austerlitz found this part the most
difficult, and had to be so attentive to the Queen of Bavaria that
Josephine was jealous. However, all the matches came off, and still
more remarkable, all turned out happily, a fact which certainly
redounds to Napoleon's credit as a match-maker.

On December 31st, at 1.45 A.M., he entered Munich by torchlight and
under a triumphal arch. His chamberlain, M. de Thiard, assured him
that if he left Munich the marriage with Eugène would fall through,
and he agrees to stay, although he declared that his absence, which
accentuated the Bank crisis, is costing him 1,500,000 francs a day.
The marriage took place on January 14th, four days after Eugène
arrived at Munich and three days after that young Bayard had been
bereft of his cherished moustache. Henceforth the bridegroom is called
"Mon fils" in Napoleon's correspondence, and in the contract of
marriage Napoleon-Eugène de France. The Emperor and Empress reached
the Tuileries on January 27th. The marriage of Stephanie was even more
difficult to manage, for, as St. Amand points out, the Prince of Baden
had for brothers-in-law the Emperor of Russia, the King of Sweden, and
the King of Bavaria--two of whom at least were friends of England.
Josephine had once an uncle-in-law, the Count Beauharnais, whose wife
Fanny was a well-known literary character of the time, but of whom the
poet Lebrun made the epigram--

  "Elle fait son visage, et ne fait pas ses vers."

Stephanie was the grand-daughter of this couple, and as Grand-Duchess
of Baden was beloved and respected, and lived on until 1860.


FOOTNOTES

  [58] The first month of the Republican calendar.

  [59] Memoirs, vol. ii. 165.




SERIES G


No. 1.

Napoleon left St. Cloud with Josephine on September 25th, and had
reached Mayence on the 28th, where his Foot Guard were awaiting him.
He left Mayence on October 1st, and reached Würzburg the next day,
whence this letter was written, just before starting for Bamberg.
Josephine was installed in the Teutonic palace at Mayence.

_Princess of Baden_, Stephanie Beauharnais. (For her marriage, see
note, end of Series F.)

_Hortense_ was by no means happy with her husband at the best of
times, and she cordially hated Holland. She was said to be very
frightened of Napoleon, but (like most people) could easily influence
her mother. Napoleon's letter to her of this date (October 5th) is
certainly not a severe one:--"I have received yours of September 14th.
I am sending to the Chief Justice in order to accord pardon to the
individual in whom you are interested. Your news always gives me
pleasure. I trust you will keep well, and never doubt my great
friendship for you."

_The Grand Duke_, _i.e._ of Würzburg. The castle where Napoleon
was staying seemed to him sufficiently strong to be armed and
provisioned, and he made a great depôt in the city. "Volumes," says
Méneval, "would not suffice to describe the multitude of his
military and administrative measures here, and the precautions which
he took against even the most improbable hazards of war."

_Florence._--Probably September 1796, when Napoleon was hard pressed,
and Josephine had to fetch a compass from Verona to regain Milan, and
thus evade Wurmser's troops.


No. 2.

_Bamberg._--Arriving at Bamberg on the 6th, Napoleon issued a
proclamation to his army which concluded--"Let the Prussian army
experience the same fate that it experienced fourteen years ago. Let
it learn that, if it is easy to acquire increase of territory and
power by means of the friendship of the great people, their enmity,
which can be provoked only by the abandonment of all spirit of wisdom
and sense, is more terrible than the tempests of the ocean."

_Eugène._--Napoleon wrote him on the 5th, and twice on the 7th, on
which date we have _eighteen_ letters in the _Correspondence_.

_Her husband._--The Hereditary Grand Duke of Baden, to whom Napoleon
had written from Mayence on September 30th, accepting his services,
and fixing the rendezvous at Bamberg for October 4th or 5th.

On this day Napoleon invaded Prussian territory by entering Bayreuth,
having preceded by one day the date of their ultimatum--a rhapsody of
twenty pages, which Napoleon in his First Bulletin compares to "one of
those which the English Cabinet pay their literary men £500 per annum
to write." It is in this Bulletin where he describes the Queen of
Prussia (dressed as an Amazon, in the uniform of her regiment of
dragoons, and writing twenty letters a day) to be like Armida in her
frenzy, setting fire to her own palace.


No. 3.

By this time the Prussian army is already in a tight corner, with its
back on the Rhine, which, as Napoleon says in his Third Bulletin
written on this day, is "_assez bizarre_, from which very important
events should ensue." On the previous day he concludes a letter to
Talleyrand--"One cannot conceive how the Duke of Brunswick, to whom
one allows some talent, can direct the operations of this army in so
ridiculous a manner."

_Erfurt._--Here endless discussions, but, as Napoleon says in his
bulletin of this day--"Consternation is at Erfurt, ... but while they
deliberate, the French army is marching.... Still the wishes of the
King of Prussia have been executed; he wished that by October 8th the
French army should have evacuated the territory of the Confederation
which _has_ been evacuated, but in place of repassing the Rhine, it
has passed the Saal."

_If she wants to see a battle._--_Queen Louise_, great-grandmother of
the present Emperor William, and in 1806 aged thirty. St. Amand says
that "when she rode on horseback before her troops, with her helmet of
polished steel, shaded by a plume, her gleaming golden cuirass, her
tunic of cloth of silver, her red buskins with golden spurs," she
resembled, as the bulletin said, one of the heroines of Tasso. She
hated France, and especially Napoleon, as the child of the French
Revolution.


No. 4.

_I nearly captured him and the Queen._--They escaped only by an hour,
Napoleon writes Berthier. Blucher aided their escape by telling a
French General about an imaginary armistice, which the latter was
severely reprimanded by Napoleon for believing.

No battle was more beautifully worked out than the battle of
Jena--Davoust performing specially well his move in the combinations
by which the Prussian army was hopelessly entangled, as Mack at Ulm a
year before. Bernadotte alone, and as usual, gave cause for
dissatisfaction. He had a personal hatred for his chief, caused by the
knowledge that his wife (Désirée Clary) had never ceased to regret
that she had missed her opportunity of being the wife of Napoleon.
Bernadotte, therefore, was loth to give initial impetus to the
victories of the French Emperor, though, when success was no longer
doubtful, he would prove that it was not want of capacity but want of
will that had kept him back. He was the Talleyrand of the camp, and
had an equal aptitude for fishing in troubled waters.

_I have bivouacked._--Whether the issue of a battle was decisive,
or, as at Eylau, only partially so, Napoleon never shunned the
disagreeable part of battle--the tending of the wounded and the
burial of the dead. Savary tells us that at Jena, as at Austerlitz,
the Emperor rode round the field of battle, alighting from his horse
with a little brandy flask (constantly refilled), putting his hand
to each unconscious soldier's breast, and when he found unexpected
life, giving way to a joy "impossible to describe" (vol. ii. 184).
Méneval also speaks of his performing this "pious duty, in the
fulfilment of which nothing was allowed to stand in his way."


No. 5.

_Fatigues, bivouacs ... have made me fat._--The Austerlitz campaign
had the same effect. See a remarkable letter to Count Miot de Melito
on January 30th, 1806: "The campaign I have just terminated, the
movement, the excitement have made me stout. I believe that if all the
kings of Europe were to coalesce against me I should have a ridiculous
paunch." And it was so!

_The great M. Napoleon_, aged four, and the younger, aged two, are
with Hortense and their grandmother at Mayence, where a Court had
assembled, including most of the wives of Napoleon's generals, burning
for news. A look-out had been placed by the Empress some two miles on
the main-road beyond Mayence, whence sight of a courier was signalled
in advance.


No. 7.

_Potsdam._--As a reward for Auerstadt, Napoleon orders Davoust and his
famous Third Corps to be the first to enter Berlin the following day.


No. 8.

Written from Berlin, where he is from October 28th to November 25th.

_You do nothing but cry._--Josephine spent her evenings gauging
futurity with a card-pack, and although it announced Jena and
Auerstadt before the messenger, it may possibly, thinks M. Masson,
have been less propitious for the future--and behind all was the
sinister portion of the spae-wife's prophecy still unfulfilled.


No. 9A.

_Madame Tallien_ had been in her time, especially in the years
1795-99, one of the most beautiful and witty women in France. Madame
d'Abrantès calls her the Venus of the Capitol; and Lucien Bonaparte
speaks of the court of the voluptuous Director, Barras, where the
beautiful Tallien was the veritable Calypso. The people, however,
could not forget her second husband, Tallien, from whom she was
divorced in 1802 (having had three children born while he was in
Egypt, 1798-1802); and whilst they called Josephine "Notre Dame des
Victoires," they called Madame Tallien "Notre Dame de Septembre."

The latter was, however, celebrated both for her beauty and her
intrigues;[60] and when, in 1799, Bonaparte seized supreme power the
fair lady[61] invaded Barras in his bath to inform him of it; but
found her indolent Ulysses only capable of ejaculating, "What can be
done? that man has taken us all in!" Napoleon probably remembered
this, and may refer to her rather than to the Queen of Prussia in the
next letter, where he makes severe strictures on intriguing women.
Moreover, Napoleon in his early campaigns had played a ridiculous part
in some of Gillray's most indecent cartoons, where Mmes. Tallien and
Josephine took with Barras the leading rôles; and as Madame Tallien
was not considered respectable in 1796, she was hardly a fit friend
for the Empress of the French ten years later. In the interval this
lady, divorced a second time, had married the Prince de Chimay
(Caraman). Napoleon knew also that she had been the mistress of
Ouvrard, the banker, who in his Spanish speculations a few months
earlier had involved the Bank of France to the tune of four millions
sterling, and forced Napoleon to make a premature peace after
Austerlitz. The Emperor had returned at white heat to Paris, and
wished he could build a gallows for Ouvrard high enough for him to be
on view throughout France. Madame Tallien's own father, M. de
Cabarrus, was a French banker in Spain, and probably in close relation
with Ouvrard.


No. 10.

Written from Berlin.

_The bad things I say about women._--Napoleon looked upon this as a
woman's war, and his temper occasionally gets the mastery of him. No
war had ever been so distasteful to him or so personal. Prussia, whose
alliance he had been courting for nearly ten years, was now worthless
to him, and all because of petticoat government at Berlin. In the
Fifteenth Bulletin (dated Wittenburg, October 23rd) he states that
the Queen had accused her husband of cowardice in order to bring about
the war. But it is doubtless the Sixteenth Bulletin (dated Potsdam,
October 25th) to which Josephine refers, and which refers to the oath
of alliance of the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in the
death chamber of Frederick the Great. "It is from this moment that the
Queen quitted the care of her domestic concerns and the serious
occupations of the toilet in order to meddle with the affairs of
State." He refers to a Berlin caricature of the scene which was at the
time in all the shops, "exciting even the laughter of clodhoppers."
The handsome Emperor of Russia was portrayed, by his side the Queen,
and on his other side the King of Prussia with his hand raised above
the tomb of the Great Frederick; the Queen herself, draped in a shawl
nearly as the London engravings represent Lady Hamilton, pressing her
hand on her heart, and apparently gazing upon the Emperor of Russia."
In the Eighteenth Bulletin (October 26th) it is said the Prussian
people did not want war, that a handful of women and young officers
had alone made this "tapage," and that the Queen, "formerly a timid
and modest woman looking after her domestic concerns," had become
turbulent and warlike, and had "conducted the monarchy within a few
days to the brink of the precipice."

As the Queen of Prussia was a beautiful woman, she has had nearly as
many partisans as Mary Stuart or Marie Antoinette, but with far less
cause. Napoleon, who was the incarnation of practical common sense,
saw in her the first cause of the war, and considered that so far as
verbal flagellation could punish her, she should have it. He had
neither time nor sympathy for the "Please you, do not hurt us"
attitude of a bellicose new woman, who, as Imogen or Ida, have played
with edged tools from the time of Shakespeare to that of Sullivan.

As an antidote, however, to his severe words against women he put,
perhaps somewhat ostentatiously, the Princess d'Hatzfeld episode in
his Twenty-second Bulletin (Berlin, October 29th). A year later
(November 26th, 1807), when his Old Guard return to Paris and free
performances are given at all the theatres, there is the "Triumph of
Trajan" at the Opera, where Trajan, burning with his own hand the
papers enclosing the secrets of a conspiracy, is a somewhat skilful
allusion to the present episode.


No. 11.

Magdeburg had surrendered on November 8th, with 20 generals, 800
officers and 22,000 men, 800 pieces of cannon, and immense stores.

_Lubeck._--This capitulation was that of Blucher, who had escaped
after Jena through a rather dishonourable ruse. It had taken three
army corps to hem him in.


No. 13.

Written from Berlin, but not included in the _Correspondence_.

_Madame L----_, _i.e._ Madame de la Rochefoucauld, a third or fourth
cousin (by her first marriage) of Josephine, and her chief lady of
honour. She was an incorrigible Royalist, and hated Napoleon; but as
she had been useful at the Tuileries in establishing the Court,
Napoleon, as usual, could not make up his mind to cause her dismissal.
In 1806, however, she made Josephine miserable and Mayence unbearable.
She foretold that the Prussians would win every battle, and even after
Jena she (to use an expression of M. Masson), "continued her music on
the sly" (_en sourdine_). See Letters 19 and 26 of this Series.


No. 17.

_December 2_, the anniversary of Austerlitz (1805) and of Napoleon's
coronation (1804). He now announces to his soldiers the Polish
campaign.


No. 18.

Not in the _Correspondence_.

_Jealousy._--If Josephine's letters and conduct had been a little more
worthy of her position, she might have saved herself. Madame Walewski,
who had not yet appeared on the scene.


No. 19.

_Désir de femme est un feu qui dévore._--The quotation is given in
Jung's "Memoirs of Lucien" (vol. ii. 62). "Ce qu'une femme desire est
un feu qui consume, celui d'une reine un vulcan qui dévore."


No. 23.

_I am dependent on events._--He says the same at St. Helena.
"Throughout my whole reign I was the keystone of an edifice entirely
new, and resting on the most slender foundations. Its duration
depended on the issue of my battles. I was never, in truth, master of
my own movements; I was never at my own disposal."


No. 26.

_The fair ones of Great Poland._--If Berthier and other regular
correspondents of Josephine were like Savary in their enthusiasm, no
wonder the Mayence coterie began to stir up jealousy. Here is the
description of the Duke of Rovigo (vol. ii. 17): "The stay at Warsaw
had for us something of witchery; even with regard to amusements it
was practically the same life as at Paris: the Emperor had his concert
twice a week, at the end of which he held a reception, where many of
the leading people met. A great number of ladies from the best
families were admired alike for the brilliancy of their beauty, and
for their wonderful amiability. One may rightly say that the Polish
ladies inspired with jealousy the charming women of every other
civilised clime. They united, for the most part, to the manners of
good society a fund of information which is not commonly found even
among Frenchwomen, and is very far above anything we see in towns,
where the custom of meeting in public has become a necessity. It
seemed to us that the Polish ladies, compelled to spend the greater
part of the year in their country-houses, applied themselves there to
reading as well as to the cultivation of their talents, and it was
thus that in the chief towns, where they went to pass the winter, they
appeared successful over all their rivals." St. Amand says: "In the
intoxication of their enthusiasm and admiration, the most beautiful
among them--and Poland is the country of beauty--lavished on him,
like sirens, their most seducing smiles...." Josephine was right to be
jealous, for, as the artist Baron Lejeune adds, "They were, moreover,
as graceful as the Creole women so often are."

_A wretched barn_, reached over still more wretched roads. The Emperor
and his horse had nearly been lost in the mud, and Marshal Duroc had a
shoulder put out by his carriage being upset.

_Such things become common property._--So was another event, much to
Josephine's chagrin. On this date Napoleon heard of a son (Léon) born
to him by Eléanore, a former schoolfellow of Madame Murat. M. Masson
thinks this event epoch-making in the life of Napoleon. "Henceforth
the charm is broken, and the Emperor assured of having an heir of his
own blood."


No. 27.

_Warsaw, January 3._--On his way from Pultusk on January 1, he had
received a Polish ovation at Bronie, where he first met Madame
Walewski. The whole story is well told by M. Masson in _Napoléon et
les Femmes_; but here we must content ourselves with the mere facts,
and first, for the sake of comparison, cite his love-letters to the
lady in question:--(1.) "I have seen only you, I have admired only
you, I desire only you. A very prompt answer to calm the impatient
ardour of N." (2.) "Have I displeased you? I have still the right to
hope the contrary. Have I been mistaken? Your eagerness diminishes,
while mine augments. You take away my rest! Oh, give a little joy, a
little happiness to a poor heart all ready to worship you. Is it so
difficult to get a reply? You owe me one.--N." (3.) "There are moments
when too high rank is a burden, and that is what I feel. How can I
satisfy the needs of a heart hopelessly in love, which would fling
itself at your feet, and which finds itself stopped by the weight of
lofty considerations paralysing the most lively desires? Oh, if you
would! Only you could remove the obstacles that lie between us. My
friend Duroc will clear the way. Oh, come! come! All your wishes shall
be gratified. Your native land will be dearer to me when you have had
pity on my poor heart,--N." (4.) "Marie, my sweet Marie! My first
thought is for you, my first desire to see you again. You will come
again, will you not? You promised me to do so. If not, the eagle will
fly to you. I shall see you at dinner, a friend tells me. Deign, then,
to accept this bouquet; let it become a mysterious link which shall
establish between us a secret union in the midst of the crowd
surrounding us. Exposed to the glances of the crowd, we shall still
understand each other. When my hand presses my heart, you will know
that it is full of thoughts of you; and in answer you will press
closer your bouquet. Love me, my bonny Marie, and never let your hand
leave your bouquet.--N." In this letter, in which he has substituted
_tu_ for _vous_, there is more passion than we have seen since 1796.
The fair lady now leaves her decrepit old husband, nearly fifty years
her senior, and takes up her abode in Finckenstein Castle, for nearly
two months of the interval between Eylau and Friedland. "In order,"
says Pasquier, "that nothing should be lacking to characterise the
calm state of his mind and the security of his position, it was soon
known that he had seen fit to enjoy a pleasurable relaxation by
calling to him a Polish gentlewoman of excellent birth, with whom he
had contracted a _liaison_ while passing through Warsaw, and who, as a
consequence of this journey, had the honour of bearing him a son."
Repudiated by her husband, she came to Paris, where she was very
kindly treated by Josephine, who, having once seen her, found in her
no rival, but an enthusiastic patriot, "sacrificed to Plutus," as
Napoleon told Lucien at Mantua a few months later, adding that "her
soul was as beautiful as her face."


No. 28.

_Be cheerful--gai._--This adjective is a favourite one in letters to
his wife, and dates from 1796.


No. 29.

_Roads unsafe and detestable._--The French troops used to say that the
four following words constituted the whole language of the Poles:
_Kleba?_ _Niema._ _Vota?_ _Sara._ ("Some bread? There is none. Some
water? We will go and fetch it.") Napoleon one day passed by a
column of infantry suffering the greatest privations on account of the
mud, which prevented the arrival of provisions. "Papa, kleba?"
exclaimed a soldier. "Niema," replied the Emperor. The whole column
burst into a fit of laughter; they asked for nothing more. Baron
Lejeune, Constant, and Méneval have variants of the same story.


No. 35.

Written from Warsaw, and omitted from the _Correspondence_.

_I hope that you are at Paris._--Madame Junot hints that her husband,
as Governor of Paris, was being sounded by Bonaparte's sister, Murat's
wife (with whom Junot was in love), if he would make Murat Napoleon's
successor, in lieu of Eugène, if the Emperor were killed. If Napoleon
had an inkling of this, he would wish Josephine to be on the spot.

_T._--Is probably Tallien, who had misconducted himself in Egypt.
Madame Junot met him at Madrid, but she and others had not forgotten
the September massacres. "The wretch! how did he drag on his loathsome
existence?" she exclaims.


No. 36.

_Paris._--Josephine arrived here January 31st; Queen Hortense going to
the Hague and the Princess Stephanie to Mannheim.


No. 38.

Probably written from Arensdorf, on the eve of the battle of Eylau
(February 9th), on which day a great ball took place in Paris, given
by the Minister of Marine.


No. 39.

_Eylau._--The battle of Preussich-Eylau was splendidly fought on both
sides, but the Russian general, Beningsen, had all the luck. (1) His
Cossacks capture Napoleon's letter to Bernadotte, which enables him to
escape all Napoleon's plans, which otherwise would have destroyed half
the Russian army. (2) A snowstorm in the middle of the day in the
faces of the French ruins Augereau's corps and saves the Russians
from a total rout. (3) The arrival of a Prussian army corps, under
General Lestocq, robbed Davoust of his glorious victory on the right,
and much of the ground gained--including the village of Kuschnitten.
(4) The night came on just in time to save the rest of the Russian
army, and to prevent Ney taking any decisive part in the battle.
Bernadotte, as usual, failed to march to the sound of the guns, but,
as Napoleon's orders to do so were captured by Cossacks, he might have
had an excuse rather better than usual, had not General Hautpoult,[62]
in touch both with him and Napoleon, advised him of his own orders and
an imminent battle. Under such circumstances, no general save the
Prince of Ponte-Corvo, says Bignon, would have remained inactive, "but
it was the destiny of this marshal to have a rôle apart in all the
great battles fought by the Emperor. His conduct was at least strange
at Jena, it will not be less so, in 1809, at Wagram." The forces,
according to Matthieu Dumas (_Précis des Evénements Militaires_,
volume 18), were approximately 65,000 French against 80,000
allies[63]--the latter in a strong chosen position. Napoleon saved
1500, the wreckage of Augereau's[64] corps, that went astray in the
blizzard (costing the French more than half their loss in the two
days' fight), by a charge of his Horse Guard, but his Foot Guard never
fired a shot. The allies lost 5000 to 6000 dead and 20,000 wounded.
Napoleon told Montholon that his loss at Eylau was 18,000, which
probably included 2000 dead, and 15,000 to 16,000 wounded and
prisoners. As the French remained masters of the field of battle, the
slightly wounded were evidently not counted by Napoleon, who in his
bulletin gives 1900 dead and 5700 wounded. The list of wounded inmates
of the hospital a month later, March 8th, totalled only 4600, which
astonished Napoleon, who sent back for a recount. On receipt of this
he wrote Daru (March 15): "From your advices to hand, I see we are
not far out of count. There were at the battle of Eylau 4000 or 5000
wounded, and 1000 in the combats preceding the battle."


No. 40.

_Corbineau._--Mlle. d'Avrillon (vol. ii. 101) tells how, in haste to
join his regiment at Paris, Corbineau had asked for a seat in her
carriage from St. Cloud. She was delighted, as he was a charming man,
"with no side on like Lauriston and Lemarois." He had just been made
general, and said, "Either I will get killed or deserve the favour
which the Emperor has granted me. M'selle, you shall hear me spoken
of; if I am not killed I will perform some startling deed."

_Dahlmann._--General Nicholas Dahlmann, commanding the chasseurs of
the guard, was killed in the charge on the Russian infantry which
saved the battle. On April 22nd Napoleon wrote Vice-Admiral Decrés to
have three frigates put on the stocks to be called Dahlmann,
Corbineau, and Hautpoul, and in each captain's cabin a marble
inscription recounting their brave deeds.


No. 41.

_Young Tascher._--The third of Josephine's cousins-germain of that
name. He was afterwards aide-de-camp of Prince Eugène, and later
major-domo of the Empress Eugénie.


No. 42.

After this letter St. Amand declares that Napoleon's letters to his
wife become "cold, short, banal, absolutely insignificant." "They
consisted of a few remarks about the rain or the fine weather, and
always the same refrain--the invitation to be cheerful.... Napoleon,
occupied elsewhere, wrote no longer to his legitimate wife, but as a
duty, as paying a debt of conscience." He was occupied, indeed, but
barely as the author supposes. It is Bingham (vol. ii. 281) who
reminds us that in the first three months of 1807 we have 1715 letters
and despatches preserved of his work during that period, while he
often rode forty leagues a day, and had instructed his librarian to
send him by each morning's courier two or three new books from Paris.
Aubenas is more just than St. Amand. "If his style is no longer that
of the First Consul, still less of the General of Italy, he was
solicitous, punctilious, attentive, affectionate even although
laconic, in that correspondence (with Josephine) which, in the midst
of his much greater preoccupations, seems for him as much a pleasure
as a duty."


No. 43.

_I am still at Eylau._--It took Napoleon and his army eight days to
bury the dead and remove the wounded. Lejeune says, "His whole time
was given up now to seeing that the wounded received proper care, and
he insisted on the Russians being as well treated as the French" (vol.
i. 48). The Emperor wrote Daru that if more surgeons had been on the
spot he could have saved at least 200 lives; although, to look at the
surgical instruments used on these fields, and now preserved in the
museum of Les Invalides, it is wonderful that the men survived
operations with such ghastly implements of torture. A few days later
Napoleon tells Daru on no account to begrudge money for medicines, and
especially for quinine.

_This country is covered with dead and wounded._--"Napoleon," says
Dumas (vol. i. 18, 41), "having given order that the succour to the
wounded on both sides might be multiplied, rode over the field of
battle, which all eye-witnesses agree to have been the most horrible
field of carnage which war has ever offered. In a space of less than a
square league, the ground covered with snow, and the frozen lakes,
were heaped up with 10,000 dead, and 3000 to 4000 dead horses, débris
of artillery, arms of all kinds, cannon-balls, and shells. Six
thousand Russians, expiring of their wounds, and of hunger and thirst,
were left abandoned to the generosity of the conqueror."


No. 50.

_Osterode._--"A wretched village, where I shall pass a considerable
time." Owing to the messenger to Bernadotte being captured by
Cossacks, the Emperor, if not surprised at Eylau on the second day,
found at least all his own intentions anticipated. He could not
risk the same misfortune again, and at Osterode all his army were
within easy hailing distance, "within two marches at most" (Dumas).
Savary speaks of him there, "working, eating, giving audience, and
sleeping--all in the same room," alone keeping head against the storm
of his marshals, who wished him to retire across the Vistula. He
remained over five weeks at Osterode, and more than two months at
Finckenstein Castle, interesting himself in the affairs of Teheran
and Monte Video, offering prizes for discoveries in electricity
and medicine, giving advice as to the most scientific modes of
teaching history and geography, while objecting to the creation of
poet-laureates or Cæsarians whose exaggerated praises would be sure to
awaken the ridicule of the French people, even if it attained its
object of finding a place of emolument for poets. Bignon says
(vol. vi. 227): "From Osterode or from Finckenstein he supervised,
as from Paris or St. Cloud, the needs of France; he sought means to
alleviate the hindrances to commerce, discussed the best ways to
encourage literature and art, corresponded with all his ministers,
and while awaiting the renewal of the fray, having a war of
figures with his Chancellor of Exchequer."

_It is not as good as the great city._--The day before he had written
his brother Joseph that neither his officers nor his staff had taken
their clothes off for two months; that he had not taken his boots off
for a fortnight; that the wounded had to be moved 120 miles in
sledges, in the open air; that bread was unprocurable; that the
Emperor had been living for weeks upon potatoes, and the officers upon
mere meat. "After having destroyed the Prussian monarchy, we are
fighting against the remnant of the Prussians, against Russians,
Cossacks, and Kalmucks, those roving tribes of the north, who formerly
invaded the Roman Empire."

_I have ordered what you wish for Malmaison._--About this time he also
gave orders for what afterwards became the Bourse and the Madeleine,
and gave hints for a new journal (March 7th), whose "criticism should
be enlightened, well-intentioned, impartial, and robbed of that
noxious brutality which characterises the discussions of existing
journals, and which is so at variance with the true sentiments of the
nation."


No. 54.

_Minerva._--In a letter of March 7th Josephine writes to Hortense: "A
few days ago I saw a frightful accident at the Opera. The actress who
represented Minerva in the ballet of 'Ulysses' fell twenty feet and
broke her arm. As she is poor, and has a family to support, I have
sent her fifty louis." This was probably the ballet, "The Return of
Ulysses," a subject given by Napoleon to Fouché as a suitable subject
for representation. In the same letter Josephine writes: "All the
private letters I have received agree in saying that the Emperor was
very much exposed at the battle of Eylau. I get news of him very
often, sometimes two letters a day, but that does not replace him."
This special danger at Eylau is told by Las Cases, who heard it from
Bertrand. Napoleon was on foot, with only a few officers of his staff;
a column of four to five thousand Russians came almost in contact with
him. Berthier instantly ordered up the horses. The Emperor gave him a
reproachful look; then sent orders to a battalion of his guard to
advance, which was a good way behind, and standing still. As the
Russians advanced he repeated several times, "What audacity, what
audacity!" At the sight of his Grenadiers of the Guard the Russians
stopped short. It was high time for them to do so, as Bertrand said.
The Emperor had never stirred; all who surrounded him had been much
alarmed.


No. 55.

"It is the first and only time," says Aubenas, "that, in these two
volumes of letters (_Collection Didot_), Napoleon says _vous_ to his
wife. But his vexation does not last more than a few lines, and this
short letter ends, '_Tout à toi_.' Not content with this softening,
and convinced how grieved Josephine will be at this language of cold
etiquette, he writes to her the same day, at ten o'clock at night,
before going to bed, a second letter in his old style, which ends,
'_Mille et mille amitiés_.'" It is a later letter (March 25th) which
ends as described, but No. 56 is, nevertheless, a kind letter.


No. 56.

_Dupuis._--Former principal of the Brienne Military School. Napoleon,
always solicitous for the happiness of those whom he had known in his
youth, had made Dupuis his own librarian at Malmaison. His brother,
who died in 1809, was the learned Egyptologist.


No. 58.

_M. de T----_, _i.e._ M. de Thiard. In _Lettres Inedites de Napoleon
I._ (Brotonne), No. 176, to Talleyrand, March 22nd, the Emperor
writes: "I have had M. de Thiard effaced from the list of officers. I
have sent him away, after having testified all my displeasure, and
told him to stay on his estate. He is a man without military honour
and civic fidelity.... My intention is that he shall also be struck
off from the number of my chamberlains. I have been poignantly grieved
at such black ingratitude, but I think myself fortunate to have found
out such a wicked man in time." De Thiard seems to have been
corresponding with the enemy from Warsaw.


No. 60.

_Marshal Bessières._--His château of Grignon, now destroyed, was one
of the most beautiful of Provence. Madame de Sevigné lived and was
buried in the town of Grignon.


_No. 63._

This was printed April 24th in the French editions, but April 14th is
evidently the correct date.


No. 67.

"_Sweet, pouting, and capricious._"--Aubenas speaks of these lines "in
the style of the Italian period, which seemed in fact to calm the
fears of the Empress."


No. 68.

_Madame ----._ His own sister, Madame Murat, afterwards Queen of
Naples. See note to Letter 35 for her influence over Junot. The latter
was severely reprimanded by Napoleon on his return and banished from
Paris. "Why, for example, does the Grand Duchess occupy your boxes at
the theatres? Why does she go thither in your carriage? Hey! M. Junot!
you are surprised that I am so well acquainted with your affairs and
those of that little fool, Madame Murat?" ("Memoirs of the Duchess
d'Abrantès," vol. iii. 328.)

_Measles._--As the poor child was ill four days, it was probably
laryngitis from which he died--an ailment hardly distinguishable from
croup, and one of the commonest sequelæ of measles. He died on May
5th.

The best account is the Memoirs of Stanislaus Giraudin. They had
applied leeches to the child's chest, and had finally recourse to some
English powders of unknown composition, which caused a rally, followed
by the final collapse. King Louis said the child's death was caused by
the Dutch damp climate, which was bad for his own health. Josephine
hastens to join her daughter, but breaks down at Lacken, where
Hortense, more dead than alive, joins her, and returns to Paris with
her.


No. 69.

_I trust I may hear you have been rational in your sorrow._--As a
matter of fact he had heard the opposite, for the following day
(May 15th) he writes to his brother Jerome: "Napoleon died in three
days at the Hague; I know not if the King has advised you of it.
This event gives me the more pain insomuch as his father and mother
are not rational, and are giving themselves up to all the transports
of their grief." To Fouché he writes three days later: "I have
been very much afflicted by the misfortune which has befallen me.
I had hoped for a more brilliant destiny for that poor child;" and on
May 20th, "I have felt the loss of the little Napoleon very acutely.
I would have wished that his father and mother should have received
from their temperament as much courage as I for knowing how to bear
all the ills of life. But they are younger, and have reflected less on
the frailty of our worldly possessions." It is typical of Napoleon
that the only man to whom, as far as we know, he unbosomed his
sorrow should be one of his early friends, even though that friend
should be the false and faithless Fouché, who requited his confidence
later by vile and baseless allegations respecting the parentage of
this very child. In one respect only did Napoleon resemble David in
his supposititious sin, which was, that when the child was dead, he
had neither time nor temperament to waste in futile regrets. As he
said on another occasion, if his wife had died during the Austerlitz
Campaign it would not have delayed his operations a quarter of an
hour. But he considers practical succour to the living as the most
fitting memorial to the dead, and writes on June 4th to De Champagny:
"Twenty years ago a malady called croup showed itself in the north
of Europe. Some years ago it spread into France. I require you to
offer a prize of £500 (12,000 francs), to be given to the doctor who
writes the best essay on this malady and its mode of treatment."
Commenting on this letter Bignon (vol. vi. p. 262) adds, "It is,
however, fortunate when, on the eve of battles, warlike princes are
pondering over ways of preserving the population of their states."


No. 71.

_May 20th._--On this date he writes Hortense: "My daughter, all the
news I get from the Hague tells me that you are not rational. However
legitimate your grief, it must have limits: never impair your health;
seek distractions, and know that life is strewn with so many rocks,
and may be the source of so many miseries, that death is not the
greatest of all.--Your affectionate father, NAPOLEON."


No. 74.

_I am vexed with Hortense._--The same day he encloses with this a
letter to Hortense. "My daughter, you have not written me a line
during your great and righteous grief. You have forgotten everything,
as if you had nothing more to lose. They say you care no longer for
any one, that you are callous about everything; I note the truth of it
by your silence. This is not well, Hortense, it is not what you
promised me. Your son was everything for you. Are your mother and
myself nothing? Had I been at Malmaison I should have shared your
grief, but I should have wished you at the same time to turn to your
best friends. Good-bye, my daughter, be cheerful; it is necessary to
be resigned; keep well, in order to fulfil all your duties. My wife is
utterly miserable about your condition; do not increase her
sorrow.--Your affectionate father, NAPOLEON."

Hortense had been on such bad terms with her husband for several
months past that Napoleon evidently thinks it wiser not to allude to
him, although he had written Louis a very strong letter on his
treatment of his wife two months earlier (see letter 12,294 of the
_Correspondence_, April 4th). There is, however, a temporary reunion
between husband and wife in their common sorrow.


No. 78.

_Friedland._--On this day he wrote a further letter to the Queen of
Holland (No. 12,761 of the _Correspondence_): "My daughter, I have
your letter dated Orleans. Your grief pains me, but I should like you
to possess more courage; to live is to suffer, and the true man is
always fighting for mastery over himself. I do not like to see you
unjust towards the little Napoleon Louis, and towards all your
friends. Your mother and I had hoped to be more to you than we are."
She had been sent to take the waters of Cauterets, and had left her
child Napoleon Louis (who died at Forli, 1831) with Josephine, who
writes to her daughter (June 11th): "He amuses me much; he is so
gentle. I find he has all the ways of that poor child that we mourn."
And a few days later: "There remains to you a husband, an interesting
child, and a mother whose love you know." Josephine had with women the
same tact that her husband had with men, but the Bonaparte family,
with all its good qualities, strained the tact and tempers of both to
the utmost.


No. 79.

_Tilsit._--Referring to Napoleon and Alexander at Tilsit, Michaud
says: "Both full of wiles and devices, they affected nevertheless the
most perfect sentiments of generosity, which at the bottom they
scarcely dreamed of practising. Reunited, they were the masters of the
world, but such a union seemed impossible; they would rather share it
among themselves. Allies and rivals, friends and enemies, all were
sacrificed; henceforth there were to be only two powers, that of the
East and that of the West. Bonaparte at this time actually ruled from
the Niemen to the Straits of Gibraltar, from the North Sea to the base
of the Italian Peninsula."


FOOTNOTES

  [60] Bouillet, _Dictionnaire Universelle_, &c.

  [61] "The Queen of that Court was the fair Madame Tallien. All that
       imagination can conceive will scarcely approach the reality;
       beautiful after the antique fashion, she had at once grace and
       dignity; without being endowed with a superior wit, she
       possessed the art of making the best of it, and won people's
       hearts by her great kindness."--_Memoirs of Marmont_, vol. i.,
       p. 887.

  [62] This brave general was mortally wounded in the cavalry charge
       which saved the battle, and the friends of Bernadotte assert
       that the message was never given--an assertion more credible if
       the future king's record had been better on other occasions.

  [63] Alison says 75,000 allies, 85,000 French, but admits allies had
       100 more cannon.

  [64] Augereau, says Méneval, went out of his mind during this battle,
       and had to be sent back to France.




SERIES H


No. 1.

_Milan._--Magnificent public works were set on foot by Napoleon at
Milan, and the Cathedral daily adorned with fresh marvels of
sculpture. Arriving here on the morning of the 22nd, Napoleon goes
first to hear the _Te Deum_ at the Cathedral, then to see Eugène's
wife at the Monza Palace; in the evening to the La Scala Theatre, and
finishes the day (to use an Irishism) by working most of the night.

_Mont Cenis._--"The roads of the Simplon and Mont Cenis were kept in
the finest order, and daily attracted fresh crowds of strangers to the
Italian plains." So says Alison, but on the present occasion Napoleon
was overtaken by a storm which put his life in danger. He was
fortunate enough to reach a cave in which he took refuge. This cave
appeared to him, as he afterwards said, "a cave of diamonds"
(Méneval).

_Eugène._--The writer in _Biog. Univ._ (art. Josephine) says: "During
a journey that Napoleon made in Italy (November 1807) he wished, while
loading Eugène with favours, to prepare his mind for his mother's
divorce. The Decree of Milan, by which, in default of male and
legitimate children[65] of _the direct_ _line_, he adopted Eugène for
his son and his successor to the throne of Italy, gave to those who
knew how to read the secret thoughts of the Emperor in his patent acts
the proof that he had excluded him from all inheritance in the
Imperial Crown of France, and that he dreamed seriously of a new
alliance himself."


No. 2.

_Venice._--The Venetians gave Napoleon a wonderful ovation--many
nobles spending a year's income on the fêtes. "Innumerable gondolas
glittering with a thousand colours and resounding with the harmony of
instruments, escorted the barges which bore, together with the master
of the world, the Viceroy and the Vice-Queen of Italy, the King and
Queen of Bavaria, the Princess of Lucca, the King of Naples (Joseph,
who stayed six days with his brother), the Grand Duke of Berg, the
Prince of Neufchâtel, and the greater part of the generals of the old
army of Italy" (Thiers). While at Venice Napoleon was in easy touch
with the Porte, of which he doubtless made full use, while, _per
contra_, he was expected to give Greece her independence.

_November 30th._--Leaving Milan, Napoleon came straight through
Brescia to Verona, where he supped with the King and Queen of
Bavaria. The next morning he started for Vicenza through avenues of
vine-encircled poplars and broad yellow wheat-fields which "lay all
golden in the sunlight and the breeze" (Constant). The Emperor
went to the theatre at Vicenza, and left again at 2 A.M. Spending the
night at Stra, he met the Venetian authorities early the next morning
at Fusina.


No. 3.

_Udine._--He is here on the 12th, and then hastens to meet his brother
Lucien at Mantua--the main but secret object of his journey to Italy.
It is _most_ difficult to gauge the details--was it a political or a
conjugal question that made the interview a failure? Madame
D'Abrantès, voicing the rumours of the day, thinks the former; Lucien,
writing Memoirs for his wife and children, declares it to be the
latter. Napoleon was prepared to legalise the children of his first
wife, and marry the eldest to Prince Ferdinand, the heir to the
Spanish crown; but Lucien considers the Bourbons to be enemies of
France and of the Bonapartes. These Memoirs of Lucien are not perhaps
very trustworthy, especially where his prejudices overlap his memory
or his judgment, but always instructive and very readable. When the
account of this interview was written (early in 1812), Lucien was an
English prisoner, furious that his brother has just refused to
exchange him for "some English Lords." Speaking of Josephine, the
Emperor tells him that in spite of her reputation for good-nature, she
is more malicious than generally supposed, although for her husband
"she has no nails"; but he adds that rumours of impending divorce have
made life between them very constrained. "Only imagine," continued the
Emperor, "that wife of mine weeps every time she has indigestion,
because she says she thinks herself poisoned by those who wish me to
marry some one else. It is perfectly hateful." He said that Joseph
also thought of a divorce, as his wife gave him only daughters, and
that the three brothers might be remarried on the same day. The
Emperor regretted not having taken the Princess Augusta, daughter of
his "best friend, the King of Bavaria," for himself, instead of for
Eugène, who did not know how to appreciate her and was unfaithful. He
was convinced that Russia by invading India would overthrow England,
and that his own soldiers were ready to follow him to the antipodes.
He ends by offering Lucien his choice of thrones--Naples, Italy, "the
brightest jewel of my Imperial crown," or Spain[66] (Madame D'Abrantès
adds _Prussia_), if he will give way about Madame Jouberthon and her
children. "Tout pour Lucien divorcé, rien pour Lucien sans divorce."
When Napoleon finds his brother obdurate he makes Eugène Prince of
Venice, and his eldest daughter Princess of Bologna, with a large
appanage. Lucien is in fresh disgrace within less than three months of
the Mantuan interview, for on March 11, 1808, Napoleon writes brother
Joseph, "Lucien is misconducting himself at Rome ... and is more Roman
than the Pope himself. His conduct has been scandalous; he is my open
enemy, and that of France.... I will not permit a Frenchman, and one
of my own brothers, to be the first to conspire and act against me,
with a rabble of priests."

_I may soon be in Paris._--After leaving Milan he visits the
fortifications at Alessandria, and is met by a torchlight procession
at Marengo. Letters for two days (December 27-28th) are dated Turin,
although Constant says he did not stop there. Crossing Mont Cenis on
December 30th he reaches the Tuileries on the evening of New Year's
Day (1808).


FOOTNOTES

  [65] The Decree itself says "nos enfants et descendants males,
       legitimes et naturels."

  [66] On October 11th Prince Ferdinand had written Napoleon for "the
       honour of allying himself to a Princess of his august family";
       and Lucien's eldest daughter was Napoleon's only choice.




SERIES I


No. 1.

_Bayonne_ is half-way between Paris and Madrid, nearly 600 miles from
each. Napoleon arrived here April 15th, and left July 21st, returning
with Josephine _viâ_ Pau, Tarbes, Auch, Montauban, Agen, Bordeaux,
Rochefort, Nantes. Everywhere he received a hearty welcome, even, and
especially, in La Vendée. He arrives at Paris August 14th, hearing on
August 3rd at Bordeaux of (what he calls) the "horrible catastrophe"
of General Dupont at Baylen.


No. 2.

_A country-house._--The Château of Marrac. Marbot had stayed there in
1803 with Augereau. Bausset informs us that this château had been
built either for the Infanta Marie Victoire engaged to Louis XV., or
for the Dowager Queen of Charles II., "the bewitched," when she was
packed off from Madrid to Bayonne (see Hume's _Spain_, 1479-1788).

_Everything is still most primitive._--Nevertheless he enjoyed the
_pamperruque_ which was danced before the château by seven men and ten
maidens, gaily dressed--the women armed with tambourines and the men
with castanets. Saint-Amand speaks of thirteen performers (seven men
and six maidens) chosen from the leading families of the town, to
render what for time immemorial had been considered fit homage for the
most illustrious persons.


No. 3.

_Prince of the Asturias._--The Emperor had received him at the château
of Marrac, paid him all the honours due to royalty, while evading the
word "Majesty," and insisting the same day on his giving up all claim
to the Crown of Spain. Constant says he was heavy of gait, and rarely
spoke.

_The Queen._--A woman of violent passions. The Prince of the Asturias
had designs on his mother's life, while the Queen openly begged
Napoleon to put the Prince to death. On May 9th Napoleon writes
Talleyrand to prepare to take charge of Ferdinand at Valençay, adding
that if the latter were "to become attached to some pretty woman, whom
we are sure of, it would be no disadvantage." A new experience for a
Montmorency to become the keeper of a Bourbon, rather than his
Constable. Pasquier, with his usual Malvolian decorum, gives fuller
details. Napoleon, he says, "enumerates with care (to Talleyrand) all
the precautions that are to be taken to prevent his escape, and even
goes so far as to busy himself with the distractions which may be
permitted him. And, be it noted, the principal one thrown in his way
was given him by a young person who lived at the time under M. De
Talleyrand's roof. This liaison, of which Ferdinand soon became
distrustful, did not last as long as it was desired to."


No. 4.

_A son has been born._--By a plebiscite of the year XII. (1804-5), the
children of Louis and Hortense were to be the heirs of Napoleon, and
in conformity with this the child born on April 20th at 17 Rue Lafitte
(now the residence of the Turkish Ambassador), was inscribed on the
register of the Civil List destined for princes of the blood. His two
elder brothers had not been so honoured, but in due course the King of
Rome was entered thereon. Had Louis accepted the Crown of Spain which
Napoleon had in vain offered to him, and of which Hortense would have
made an ideal Queen, the chances are that Napoleon would never have
divorced Josephine. St. Amand shows at length that the future Napoleon
III. is truly the child of Louis, and neither of Admiral Verhuell nor
of the Duke Decazes. Louis and Hortense in the present case are
sufficiently agreed to insist that the father's name be preserved by
the child, who is called Charles Louis Napoleon, and not Charles
Napoleon, which was the Emperor's first choice. In either case the
name of the croup-stricken firstborn had been preserved. On April 23rd
Josephine had already two letters from Cambacérès respecting mother
and child, and on this day the Empress writes her daughter: "I know
that Napoleon is consoled for not having a sister."

_Arrive on the 27th._--Josephine, always wishful to humour her
husband's love of punctuality, duly arrived on the day fixed, and took
up her abode with her husband in the château of Marrac. Ferdinand
wrote to his uncle in Madrid to beware of the cursed Frenchmen,
telling him also that Josephine had been badly received at Bayonne.
The letter was intercepted, and Napoleon wrote Murat that the writer
was a liar, a fool, and a hypocrite. The Emperor, in fact, never
trusted the Prince henceforward. Bausset, who translated the letter,
tells how the Emperor could scarcely believe that the Prince would use
so strong an adjective, but was convinced on seeing the word
_maldittos_, which he remarked was almost the Italian--_maledetto_.




SERIES J


Leaving St. Cloud September 22nd, Napoleon is at Metz on the 23rd, at
Kaiserlautern on the 24th, where he sends a message to the Empress in
a letter to Cambacérès, and on the 27th is at Erfurt. On the 28th the
Emperors of France and Russia sign a Convention of Alliance. Napoleon
leaves Erfurt October 14th (the anniversary of Jena), travels
incognito, and arrives St. Cloud October 18th.


No. 1.

_I have rather a cold._--Napoleon had insisted on going to explore a
new road he had ordered between Metz and Mayence, and which no one had
ventured to say was not complete. The road was so bad that the
carriage of the _maître des requêtes_, who had been summoned to
account for the faulty work, was precipitated a hundred feet down a
ravine near Kaiserlautern.

_I am pleased with the Emperor and every one here._--Which included
what he had promised Talma for his audience--a _parterre_ of kings.
Besides the two Emperors, the King of Prussia was represented by his
brother Prince William, Austria by General Vincent, and there were
also the Kings of Saxony, Bavaria, Würtemberg, Westphalia, and Naples,
the Prince Primate, the Princes of Anhalt, Coburg, Saxe-Weimar,
Darmstadt, Baden, and Nassau. Talleyrand, Champagny, Maret, Duroc,
Berthier, and Caulaincourt, with Generals Oudinot, Soult, and
Lauriston accompanied Napoleon. Literature was represented by Goethe,
Wieland, Müller; and feminine attractions by the Duchess of
Saxe-Weimar and the wily Princess of Tour and Taxis, sister of the
Queen of Prussia. Pasquier and others have proved that at Erfurt
Talleyrand did far more harm than good to his master's cause, and in
fact intended to do so. On his arrival he spent his first evening with
the Princess of Tour and Taxis, in order to meet the Emperor
Alexander, and said: "Sire ... It is for you to save Europe, and the
only way of attaining this object is by resisting Napoleon. The French
people are civilised, their Emperor is not: the sovereign of Russia is
civilised, his people are not. It is therefore for the sovereign of
Russia to be the ally of the French people,"--of whom Talleyrand
declared himself to be the representative. By squaring Alexander this
transcendental (unfrocked) Vicar of Bray, "with an oar in every boat,"
is once more hedging, or, to use his own phrase, guaranteeing the
future, and at the same time securing the daughter of the Duchess of
Courland for his nephew, Edmond de Périgord. "The Arch-apostate"
carried his treason so far as to advise Alexander of Napoleon's
ulterior views, and thus enabled the former to forestall them--no easy
matter in conversations with Napoleon "lasting whole days" (see
Letter No. 3, this Series). Talleyrand had also a grievance. He had
been replaced as Foreign Minister by Champagny. He had accepted the
surrender of his portfolio gladly, as now, becoming Vice-Grand
Elector, he ranked with Cambacérès and Maret. But when he found that
Napoleon, who liked to have credit for his own diplomacy, seldom
consulted him, or allowed Champagny to do so, jealousy and ill-will
naturally resulted.


No. 2.

_Shooting over the battlefield of Jena._--The presence of the Emperor
Alexander on this occasion was considered a great affront to his
recent ally, the King of Prussia, and is severely commented on by Von
Moltke in one of his Essays. In fairness to Alexander, we must
remember that their host, the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, had married his
sister. Von Moltke, by the way, speaks of _hares_ forming the sport in
question, but Savary of a second battle of Jena fought against the
_partridges_. The fact seems to be that all kinds of game, including
stags and deer, were driven by the beaters to the royal sportsmen in
their huts, and the Emperor Alexander, albeit short-sighted, succeeded
in killing a stag, at eight feet distance, _at the first shot_.

_The Weimar ball._--This followed the Jena shoot, and the dancing
lasted all night. The Russian courtiers were scandalised at their
Emperor dancing, but while he was present the dancing was conventional
enough, consisting of promenading two and two to the strains of a
Polish march. "Imperial Waltz, imported from the Rhine," was already
the rage in Germany, and Napoleon, in order to be more worthy of his
Austrian princess, tried next year to master this new science of
tactics, but after a trial with the Princess Stephanie, the lady
declared that her pupil should always give lessons, and never receive
them. He was rather more successful at billiards, pursued under the
same praiseworthy incentive.

_A few trifling ailments._--Mainly a fearful nightmare; a new
experience, in which he imagines his vitals torn out by a bear.
"Significant of much!" As when also the Russian Emperor finds
himself without a sword and accepts that of Napoleon as a gift: and
when, on the last night, the latter orders his comedians to play
"Bajazet,"--little thinking the appointed Tamerlane was by his side.


No. 3.

_I am pleased with Alexander._--For the time being Josephine had most
reason to be pleased with Alexander, who failed to secure his sister's
hand for Napoleon.

_He ought to be with me._--He might have been, had not Napoleon
purposely evaded the Eastern Question. On this subject Savary
writes (vol. ii. 297):--"Since Tilsit, Napoleon had sounded the
personal views of his ambassador at Constantinople, General
Sebastiani, as to this proposition of the Emperor of Russia (_i.e._
the partition of Turkey). This ambassador was utterly opposed to
this project, and in a long report that he sent to the Emperor on his
return from Constantinople, he demonstrated to him that it was
absolutely necessary for France never to consent to the dismemberment
of the Turkish Empire; the Emperor Napoleon adopted his views." And
these Talleyrand knew. The whirligig of time brings about its
revenges, and in less than fifty years Lord Palmerston had to seek
an alliance with France and the house of Napoleon in order to
maintain the fixed policy that sent Napoleon I. to Moscow and to
St. Helena. "Alexander, with justice," says Alison, "looked upon
Constantinople as the back-door of his empire, and was earnest that
its key should be placed in his hands." "Alexander," Napoleon told
O'Meara, "wanted to get Constantinople, which I would not allow,
as it would have destroyed the equilibrium of power in Europe. I
reflected that France would gain Egypt, Syria, and the islands,
which would have been nothing in comparison with what Russia would
have obtained. I considered that the barbarians of the north were
already too powerful, and probably in the course of time would
overwhelm all Europe, as I now think they will. Austria already
trembles: Russia and Prussia united, Austria falls, and England
cannot prevent it."

_Erfurt_ is the meridian of Napoleon's first thirteen years
(1796-1808)--each more glorious; henceforward (1809-1821) ever faster
he "rolls, darkling, down the torrent of his fate."




SERIES K


No. 5.

Written from Aranda.


No. 6.

Written from the Imperial Camp outside Madrid. Neither Napoleon[67]
nor Joseph entered the capital, but King Joseph took up his abode at
the Prado, the castle of the Kings of Spain, two miles away; while the
Emperor was generally at Chamartin, some five miles distant. He had
arrived on the heights surrounding Madrid on his Coronation Day
(December 2nd), and does not fail to remind his soldiers and his
people of this auspicious coincidence. The bulletin concludes with a
tirade against England, whose conduct is "shameful," but her troops
"well disciplined and superb." It declares that Spain has been treated
by them as they have treated Holland, Sardinia, Austria, Russia, and
Sweden. "They foment war everywhere; they distribute weapons like
poison; but they shed their blood only for their direct and personal
interests."

_Parisian weather of the last fortnight in May._--In his bulletin of
the 13th, he says: "Never has such a month of December been known in
this country; one would think it the beginning of spring." But ten
days later all was changed, and the storm of Guadarrama undoubtedly
saved Moore and the English army. "Was it then decreed," groans
Thiers, "that we, who were always successful against combined Europe,
should on no single occasion prevail against those implacable foes?"


No. 8.

Other letters of this date are headed Madrid.

_Kourakin._--Alexander Kourakin was the new Russian Ambassador at
Paris, removed thence from Vienna to please Napoleon, and to replace
Tolstoi, who, according to Savary, was always quarrelling with French
officers on military points, but who could hardly be so narrow-minded
a novice on these points as his namesake of to-day. This matter had
been arranged at Erfurt.


No. 9.

_The English appear to have received reinforcements._--Imagine a
Transvaal with a population of ten millions, and one has a fair idea
of the French difficulties in Spain, even without Portugal. The
Spaniards could not fight a scientific battle like Jena or Friedland,
but they were incomparable at guerilla warfare. The Memoirs of Barons
Marbot and Lejeune have well demonstrated this. The latter, an
accomplished linguist, sent to locate Moore's army, found that to pass
as an Englishman the magic words "Damn it," won him complete success.


No. 10.

_Benavente._--Here they found 600 horses, which had been hamstrung by
the English.

_The English flee panic-stricken._--The next day Napoleon writes
Fouché to have songs written, and caricatures made of them, which are
also to be translated into German and Italian, and circulated in
Germany and Italy.

_The weather is very bad._--Including 18 degrees of frost. Savary says
they had never felt the cold so severe in Poland--and that they ran a
risk of being buried in the snow. The Emperor had to march on foot and
was very much tired. "On these occasions," adds Savary, "the Emperor
was not selfish, as people would have us believe ... he shared his
supper[68] and his fire with all who accompanied him: he went so far
as to make those eat whom he saw in need of it." Napier gives other
details: "Napoleon, on December 22nd, has 50,000 men at the foot of
the Guadarrama. A deep snow choked the passes of the Sierra, and after
twelve hours' toil the advanced guards were still on the wrong side:
the general commanding reported the road impracticable, but Napoleon,
dismounting, placed himself at the head of the column, and amidst
storms of hail and driving snow, led his soldiers over the mountain."
At the passage of the Esla Moore escapes Napoleon by twelve hours.
Marbot, as usual, gives picturesque details. Officers and men marched
with locked arms, the Emperor between Lannes and Duroc. Half-way up,
the marshals and generals, who wore jack-boots, could go no further.
Napoleon, however, got hoisted on to a gun, and bestrode it: the
marshals and generals did the same, and in this grotesque order they
reached, after four hours' toil, the convent at the summit.

_Lefebvre._--As they neared Benavente the slush became frightful, and
the artillery could not keep pace. General Lefebvre-Desnouette went
forward, with the horse regiment of the Guard, forded the Esla with
four squadrons, was outnumbered by the English (3000 to 300), but he
and sixty (Lejeune, who escaped, says a hundred) of his chasseurs were
captured. He was brought in great triumph to Sir John Moore. "That
general," says Thiers, "possessed the courtesy characteristic of all
great nations; he received with the greatest respect the brilliant
general who commanded Napoleon's light cavalry, seated him at his
table, and presented him with a magnificent Indian sabre."


No. 11.

Probably written from Astorga, where he arrived on January 1st, having
brought 50,000 men two hundred miles in ten days.

_Your letters._--These probably, and others received by a courier,
decided him to let Soult follow the English to Corunna--especially as
he knew that transports were awaiting the enemy there. He himself
prepares to return, for Fouché and Talleyrand are in league, the slim
and slippery Metternich is ambassador at Paris, Austria is arming, and
the whole political horizon, apparently bright at Erfurt, completely
overcast. Murat, balked of the Crown of Spain, is now hoping for that
of France if Napoleon is killed or assassinated. It is Talleyrand and
Fouché who have decided on Murat, and on the ultimate overthrow of the
Beauharnais. Unfortunately for their plans Eugène is apprised by
Lavalette, and an incriminating letter to Murat captured and sent
post-haste to Napoleon. This, says Pasquier, undoubtedly hastened the
Emperor's return. Ignoring the complicity of Fouché, the whole weight
of his anger falls on Talleyrand, who loses the post of High
Chamberlain, which he had enjoyed since 1804. For half-an-hour this
"arch-apostate," as Lord Rosebery calls him, receives a torrent of
invectives. "You are a thief, a coward, a man without honour; you do
not believe in God; you have all your life been a traitor to your
duties; you have deceived and betrayed everybody: nothing is sacred to
you; you would sell your own father. I have loaded you down with
gifts, and there is nothing that you would not undertake against me.
Thus, for the past ten months, you have been shameless enough, because
you supposed, rightly or wrongly, that my affairs in Spain were going
astray, to say to all who would listen to you that you always blamed
my undertaking there, whereas it was yourself who first put it into my
head, and who persistently urged it. And that man, _that unfortunate_
(he was thus designating the Duc d'Enghien), by whom was I advised of
the place of his residence? Who drove me to deal cruelly with him?
What then are you aiming at? What do you wish for? What do you hope?
Do you dare to say? You deserve that I should smash you like a
wine-glass. I can do it, but I despise you too much to take the
trouble." This we are assured by the impartial Pasquier, who heard it
from an ear-witness, and second-hand from Talleyrand, is an abstract
of what Napoleon said, and to which the ex-Bishop made no reply.


No. 12.

_The English are in utter rout._--Still little but dead men and horses
fell into his hands. Savary adds the interesting fact that all the
(800) dead cavalry horses had a foot missing, which the English had
to show their officers to prove that they had not sold their horses.
Scott, on barely sufficient evidence perhaps, states, "The very
treasure-chests of the army were thrown away and abandoned. There was
never so complete an example of a disastrous retreat." The fact seems
to have been that the soldiership was bad, but Moore's generalship
excellent. Napier writes, "No wild horde of Tartars ever fell with
more license upon their rich effeminate neighbours than did the
English troops upon the Spanish towns taken by storm." What could be
expected of such men in retreat, when even Lord Melville had just said
in extenuation of our army that the worst men make the best soldiers?


NOS. 13 AND 14.

Written at Valladolid. Here he received a deputation asking that his
brother may reside in Madrid, to which he agrees, and awaits its
arrangement before setting out for Paris.

At Valladolid he met De Pradt, whom he mistrusted; but who, like
Talleyrand, always amused him. In the present case the Abbé told him
that "the Spaniards would never thank him for interfering in their
behalf, and that they were like Sganarelle in the farce, who
quarrelled with a stranger for interfering with her husband when he
was beating her" (Scott's "Napoleon").

He leaves Valladolid January 17th, and is in Paris on January 24th. He
rode the first seventy miles, to Burgos, in five and a half hours,
stopping only to change horses.[69] Well might Savary say, "Never had
a sovereign ridden at such a speed."

_Eugène has a daughter._--The Princess Eugénie-Hortense, born December
23rd at Milan; married the hereditary Prince of Hohenzollern
Hechingen.

_They are foolish in Paris_--if not worse. Talleyrand, Fouché, and
others were forming what amounted to a conspiracy, and the Empress
herself, wittingly or unwittingly, had served as their tool. For the
first time she answers a deputation of the Corps Législatif, who come
to congratulate her on her husband's victories, and says that
doubtless his Majesty would be very sensible of the homage of an
assembly _which represents the nation_. Napoleon sees in this remark a
germ of aggression on behalf of his House of Commons, more especially
when emphasised by 125 blackballs against a Government Bill. He takes
the effective but somewhat severe step of contradicting his wife in
the _Moniteur_, or rather declaring that the Empress knew the laws too
well not to know that the Emperor was the chief representative of the
People, then the Senate, and last the Corps Législatif.

"It would be a wild and even criminal assertion to try to represent
the nation before the Emperor."

All through the first half of 1809 another dangerous plot, of which
the centre was the Princess of Tour and Taxis, had its threads far and
wide. Many of Soult's generals were implicated, and in communication
with the English, preventing their commander getting news of
Wellesley's movements (Napier). When they find Soult cannot be
traduced, they lend a willing ear to stirring up strife between the
Emperor and Soult, by suggesting that the latter should be made King
of Portugal. Madame d'Abrantès, who heard in 1814 that the idea had
found favour with English statesmen, thinks such a step would have
seriously injured Napoleon (vol. iv. 53).


FOOTNOTES

  [67] Napoleon visited Madrid and its Palais Royal incognito, and (like
       Vienna) by night (Bausset).

  [68] With Lejeune on one occasion.

  [69] _Biographie Universelle._ Michaud says _ponies_.




SERIES L


1809.

The dangers surrounding Napoleon were immense. The Austrian army,
320,000 strong (with her Landwehr, 544,000 men) and 800 cannon, had
never been so great, never so fitted for war. Prussia was already
seething with secret societies, of which as yet the only formidable
one was the Tugendbund, whose headquarters were Konigsburg, and whose
chief members were Stein, Stadion, Blucher, Jahn. Perhaps their most
sensible scheme was to form a united German empire, with the Archduke
Charles[70] as its head. The Archduke Ferdinand invaded the Duchy of
Warsaw, and had he taken Thorn with its park of 100 cannon, Prussia
was to join Austria. In Italy the Carbonari and Adelphes[71] only
waited for the French troops to go north to meet the Austrians to
spread revolt in Italy. Of the former the head lodge was at Capua and
its constitutions written in English, since England was aiding this
_chouanerie religieuse_ as a lever against Napoleon. England had an
army of 40,000 men ready to embark in any direction--to Holland,
Belgium, Naples, or Biscay, while the French troops in Portugal were
being tampered with to receive Moreau as their leader, and to march
with Spaniards and English for the Pyrenees. At Paris Talleyrand was
in partial disgrace, but he and Fouché were still plotting--the
latter, says Pelet, forwarding daily a copy of the private bulletin
(prepared for Napoleon's eye alone) to the Bourbons. After Essling and
the breaking of the Danube bridge, he hesitated between seizing
supreme power himself or offering it to Bernadotte.

Up to the last--up to March 27th--the _Correspondence_ proves that
Napoleon had hoped that war would be averted through the influence of
Russia. "All initiative," he declared, "rested on the heads of the
court of Austria." "Menaced on all sides; warned of the intentions of his
enemies by their movements and by their intercepted correspondence;
seeing from that moment hostilities imminent, he wishes to prove to
France and Europe that all the wrongs are on their side, and awaits in his
capital the news of an aggression that nothing justifies, nothing
warrants. Vain prudence! Europe will accuse him of having been the
instigator on every occasion, even in this."[72] On April 8th the
Austrians violated Bavarian territory, and during his supreme command for
the next five days Berthier endangered the safety of the French empire
in spite of the most elaborate and lucid instructions from Napoleon, which
he failed to comprehend. "Never," says Pelet, "was so much written, never
so little done. Each of his letters (Berthier's) attests the great
difference which existed between his own correspondence and that which
was dictated to him." An ideal chief of staff, he utterly lacked the
decision necessary for a commander-in-chief. The arrival of Napoleon
changed in a moment the position of affairs. "The sudden apparition of the
Emperor produced the effect of the head of Medusa, and paralysed the
enemy."[73] Within five days the Austrians were four times defeated, and
Ratisbon, the _passe-partout_ of Southern Germany and half-way house
between Strasburg and Vienna, is once more in the hands of France and her
allies. Pelet considers these operations as the finest which have been
executed either in ancient or modern times, at any rate those of which the
projects are authentically proved. He foretells that military men from
every country of Europe, but specially young Frenchmen, will religiously
visit the fields of the Laber. They will visit, with Napoleon's
_Correspondence_ in their hands, "much more precious than every other
commentary, the hills of Pfaffenhofen, the bridge of Landshut, and that
of Eckmühl, the mill of Stangl, and the woods of Roking." A few days
later the Archduke Charles writes a letter to Napoleon, which is a fair
type of those charming yet stately manners which made him at that
moment the most popular man in Europe. "Sire," he writes, "your
Majesty's arrival was announced to me by the thunder of artillery, without
giving me time to compliment you thereon. Scarcely advised of your
presence, I was made sensible of it by the losses which you have caused
me. You have taken many of my men, Sire; my troops also have made some
thousands of prisoners in places where you did not direct the
operations. I propose to your Majesty to exchange them man for man, grade
for grade, and if that offer is agreeable to you, please let me know your
intentions for the place destined for the exchange. I feel flattered,
sire, in fighting against the greatest captain of the age. I should be
more happy if destiny had chosen me to procure for my country the
benefit of a lasting peace. Whichsoever they be, the events of war or
the approach of peace, I beg your Majesty to believe that my desires
always carry me to meet you, and that I hold myself equally honoured in
finding the sword, or the olive branch, in the hand of your Majesty."


No. 1.

_DONAUWERTH._--
n the same day napoleon writes almost an identical
letter to cambacérès, adding, however, the news that the tyrolese are
in full revolt.

On april 20th he placed himself at the head of the wurtembergers and
bavarians at abensberg. he made a stirring speech (no. 15,099 of
_correspondence_), and lejeune tells us that the prince royal of
bavaria translated into german one sentence after another as the
emperor spoke, and officers repeated the translations throughout the
ranks.

On april 24th is issued from Ratisbon his proclamation to the
army:--"Soldiers, you have justified my expectations. You have made
up for your number by your bravery. You have gloriously marked the
difference between the soldiers of Cæsar and the armed cohorts of
Xerxes. In a few days we have triumphed in the pitched battles of
Thann, Abensberg, and Eckmühl, and in the combats of Peising,
Landshut, and Ratisbon. A hundred cannon, forty flags, fifty thousand
prisoners.... before a month we shall be at Vienna." It was within
three weeks! He was specially proud of Eckmühl, and we are probably
indebted to a remark of Pasquier for his chief but never divulged
reason. "A noteworthy fact in connection with this battle was that
the triumphant army was composed principally of Bavarians and
Wurtembergers. Under his direction, these allies were as greatly to be
feared as the French themselves." At St. Helena was written: "The
battle of Abensberg, the manoeuvres of Landshut, and the battle of
Eckmühl were the most brilliant and the most skilful manoeuvres of
Napoleon." Eckmühl ended with a fine exhibition of a "white arm"
mêlée by moonlight, in which the French proved the superiority of
their double cuirasses over the breastplates of the Austrians.
Pelet gives this useful abstract of the campaign of five days:--

_April 19th._--Union of the french army whilst fighting the Archduke,
whose base is already menaced.

_April 20th._--Napoleon, at Abensberg and on the banks of the Laber,
breaks the Austrian line, totally separating the centre from the left,
which he causes to be turned by Massena.

_April 21st._--He destroys their left wing at Landshut, and captures
the magazines, artillery, and train, as well as the communications of
the enemy's grand army, fixing definitely his own line of operations,
which he already directs on Vienna.

_April 22nd._--He descends the Laber to Eckmühl, gives the last blow
to the Archduke's army, of which the remnant takes refuge in
Ratisbon.

_april 23rd._--He takes that strong place, and forces the Archduke to
take refuge in the mountains of Bohemia.


No. 2.

_May 6th._--On May 1st Napoleon was still at Braunau, waiting for news
from Davoust. Travelling by night at his usual speed he reached
Lambach at noon on May 2nd, and Wels on the 3rd. The next morning he
heard Massena's cannon at Ebersberg, but reaches the field at the fall
of night--too late to save the heavy cost of Massena's frontal attack.
The French lost at least 1500 killed and wounded; the Austrians (under
Hiller) the same number killed and 7000 prisoners. Pelet defends
Massena, and quotes the bulletin of May 4th (omitted from the
_Correspondence_): "It is one of the finest feats of arms of which
history can preserve the memory! The traveller will stop and say, 'It
is here, it is here, in these superb positions, that an army of 35,000
Austrians was routed by two French divisions'" (Pelet, ii. 225).
Lejeune, and most writers, blame Massena, referring to the Emperor's
letter of May 1st in Pelet's Appendix (vol. ii.), but not in the
_Correspondence_.

Between April 17th and May 6th there is no letter to Josephine
preserved, but plenty to Eugène, and all severe--not so much for
incapacity as for not keeping the Emperor advised of what was really
happening. On May 6th he had received no news for over a week.

_The ball that touched me_--_i.e._ at Ratisbon. This was the second
time Napoleon had been wounded in battle--the first time by an
English bayonet at Toulon. On the present occasion (April 23rd)
Méneval seems to be the best authority: "Napoleon was seated on a
spot from which he could see the attack on the town of Ratisbon. He
was beating the ground with his riding-whip,[74] when a bullet,
supposed to have been fired from a Tyrolean carbine, struck him on the
big toe (Marbot says 'right ankle,' which is correct). The news of
his wound spread rapidly[75] from file to file, and he was forced
to mount on horseback to show himself to his troops. Although his
boot had not been cut the contusion was a very painful one," and in
the first house he went to for a moment's rest, he fainted. The next
day, however, he saw the wounded and reviewed his troops as usual,
and Lejeune has preserved a highly characteristic story, somewhat
similar to an experience of the Great Frederick's: "When he had
reached the seventh or eighth sergeant the Emperor noticed a
handsome young fellow with fine but stern-looking eyes and of
resolute and martial bearing, who made his musket ring again as he
presented arms. 'How many wounds?' inquired the Emperor. 'Thirty,'
replied the sergeant. 'I am not asking you your age,' said the Emperor
graciously; 'I am asking how many wounds you have received.' Raising
his voice, the sergeant again replied with the one word, 'Thirty.'
Annoyed at this reply, the Emperor turned to the colonel and said,
'The man does not understand; he thinks I am asking about his
age.' 'He understands well enough, sire,' was the reply; 'he has been
wounded thirty times.' 'What!' exclaimed the Emperor, 'you have been
wounded so often and have not got the cross!' The sergeant looked
down at his chest, and seeing that the strap of his cartridge-pouch
hid his decoration, he raised it so as to show the cross. He said
to the Emperor, with great earnestness, 'Yes, I've got one; but I've
merited a dozen!' The Emperor, who was always pleased to meet
spirited fellows such as this, pronounced the sacramental words,
'I make you an officer!' 'That's right, Emperor,' said the new
sub-lieutenant as he proudly drew himself up; 'you couldn't have
done better!'"


No. 3.

Almost an exact duplicate of this letter goes on to Paris to
Cambacérès, as also of No. 4. The moment the Emperor had heard that
the Archduke had left Budweiss and was going by the circuitous route
_viâ_ Krems to Vienna, he left Enns (May 7th) and reached Moelk the
same evening. Seeing a camp of the enemy on the other side of the
river he sends Marbot with a sergeant and six picked men to kidnap a
few Austrians during the night. The foray is successful, and three are
brought before Napoleon, one weeping bitterly. The Emperor asked the
reason, and found it was because he had charge of his master's girdle,
and would be thought to have robbed him. The Emperor had him set free
and ferried across the river, saying, "We must honour and aid virtue
wherever it shows itself." The next day he started for Saint-Polten
(already evacuated by Hiller). On his way he saw the ruins of
Dirnstein Castle, where Richard Coeur de Lion had been imprisoned. The
Emperor's comments were interesting, but are now hackneyed, and are in
most histories and memoirs--the parent source being Pelet (vol. ii.
246).


No. 4.

_Schoenbrunn_, situated a mile from Vienna, across the little river of
that name. Constant thus describes it: "Built in 1754 by the
Empress Marie Thérèse, Schoenbrunn had an admirable position; its
architecture, if defective and irregular, was yet of a majestic,
imposing type. To reach it one has to cross the bridge across the
little river Vienna. Four stone sphinxes ornament this bridge, which
is very large and well built. Facing the bridge there is a handsome
gate opening on to a large courtyard, spacious enough for seven or
eight thousand men to manoeuvre in. The courtyard is in the form
of a quadrangle surrounded by covered galleries and ornamented with
two large basins, in which are marble statues. On both sides of
the gateway are two huge obelisks of pink stone surmounted by gilt
eagles.

"In German, Schoenbrunn means 'fair spring,' and the name is derived
from a fresh and sparkling spring which is situated in the park. It
wells forth from a little mound on which a tiny grotto has been built,
carved within so as to resemble stalactites. Inside the grotto is a
recumbent naiad holding a horn, from which the water falls down into a
marble basin. In summer this little nook is deliciously cool.

"The interior of the palace merits nothing but praise. The furniture
is sumptuous, and in taste both original and distinguished. The
Emperor's bedroom (the only place in the whole edifice where there was
a chimney) was upholstered in Chinese lacquer-wood of great antiquity,
yet the painting and gilding were still quite fresh. The study
adjoining was decorated in a like way. All these apartments, except
the bedroom, were heated in winter by immense stoves, which sadly
spoilt the effect of the other furniture. Between the study and the
bedroom there was a strange apparatus called a 'flying chair,' a sort
of mechanical seat, which had been constructed for the Empress Marie
Thérèse, and which served to transport her from one floor to another,
so that she was not obliged to go up and down the staircase like every
one else. The machine was worked in the same way as at theatres, by
cords, pulleys, and a counter-weight." The Emperor drank a glassful
from the beautiful spring, Schoen Brunn, every morning. Napoleon found
the people of Vienna less favourable to the French than in 1805; and
Count Rapp told him "the people were everywhere tired of us and of our
victories." "He did not like these sort of reflections."

_May 12th._--On May 13th is dated the _seventh_ bulletin of the
army of Germany, but none of the Bulletins 2 to 6 are in the
_Correspondence_. It states that on the 10th he is before Vienna; the
Archduke Maximilian refuses to surrender; on the 11th, at 9 P.M., the
bombardment commences, and by daybreak the city capitulated, and the
Archduke fled. In his proclamation Napoleon blamed him and the
house of Austria for the bombardment. "While fleeing from the city,
their adieux to the inhabitants have been murder and arson; like
Medea, they have with their own hands slain their children." The
Viennese had sworn to emulate their ancestors in 1683, and the heroes
of Saragossa. But Alison (than whom none can do the "big bow-wow"
style better) has a thoughtful comment on what really occurred. "All
history demonstrates that there is one stage of civilisation when the
inhabitants of a metropolis are capable of such a sacrifice in defence
of their country, and only one; and that when passed, it is never
recovered. The event has proved that the Russians, in 1812, were in
the state of progress when such a heroic act was possible, but
that the inhabitants of Vienna and Paris had passed it. Most
certainly the citizens of London would never have buried themselves
under the ruins of the Bank, the Treasury, or Leadenhall Street
before capitulating to Napoleon." 1870 and the siege of Paris modify
this judgment; but the Prussian bombardment came only at the last,
and barely reached the centre of the city.


No. 5.

_Ebersdorf._--Written five days after the murderous battle of Essling.
Montgaillard, whose temper and judgment, as Alison remarks, are not
equal to his talents, cannot resist a covert sneer (writing under the
Bourbons) at Napoleon's generalship on this occasion, although he adds
a veneer by reminding us that Cæsar was defeated at Dyrrachium,
Turenne at Marienthal, Eugène at Denain, Frederick the Great at Kolin.
The crossing of the river was one which none but a victorious army,
with another[76] about to join it, could afford to risk, but which
having effected, the French had to make the best of. As Napoleon said
in his tenth bulletin, "The passage of a river like the Danube, in
front of an enemy knowing perfectly the localities, and having the
inhabitants on its side, is one of the greatest operations of war
which it is possible to conceive." The Danube hereabouts is a thousand
yards broad, and thirty feet deep. But the rising of its water
fourteen feet in three days was what no one had expected. At Ebersdorf
the first branch of the Danube was 500 yards across to an islet,
thence 340 yards across the main current to Lobau, the vast island
three miles broad and nearly three miles long, separated from the
farther bank by another 150 yards of Danube. Bertrand had made
excellent bridges, but on the 22nd the main one was carried away by a
floating mill.

_Eugène ... has completely performed the task._--At the commencement
of the campaign the Viceroy was taken unprepared. The Archduke John,
exactly his own age (twenty-seven), was burning with hatred of France.
Eugène had the impudence, with far inferior forces, to attack him at
Sacile on April 16th, but was repulsed with a loss (including
prisoners) of 6000 men. It is now necessary to retire, and the
Archduke follows him leisurely, almost within sight of Verona. By the
end of April the news of Eckmühl has reached both armies, and by May
1st the Austrians are in full retreat. As usual, Napoleon has already
divined their altered plan of campaign, and writes from Braunau on
this very day, "I doubt not that the enemy may have retired before
you; it is necessary to pursue him with activity, whilst coming to
join me as soon as possible _viâ_ Carinthia. The junction with my army
will probably take place beyond Bruck. It is probable I shall be at
Vienna by the 10th to the 15th of May." It is the successful
performance of this task of joining him and of driving back the enemy
to which Napoleon alludes in the letter. The Viceroy had been reproved
for fighting at Sacile without his cavalry, for his precipitous
retreat on Verona; and only two days earlier the Emperor had told him
that if affairs went worse he was to send for the King of Naples
(Murat) to take command. "I am no longer grieved at the blunders you
have committed, but because you do not write to me, and give me no
chance of advising you, and even of regulating my own affairs here
conformably." On May 8th Eugène defeats the Austrians on the Piave,
and the Archduke John loses nearly 10,000 men and 15 cannon. Harassed
in their retreat, they regain their own territory on May 14th--the day
after the capitulation of Vienna. Henceforward Eugène with part of the
army, and Macdonald with the rest, force their way past all
difficulties, so that when the junction with the Grand Army occurs at
Bruck, Napoleon sends (May 27th) the following proclamation: "Soldiers
of the army of Italy, you have gloriously attained the goal that I
marked out for you.... Surprised by a perfidious enemy before your
columns were united, you had to retreat to the Adige. But when you
received the order to advance, you were on the memorable fields of
Arcola, and there you swore on the manes of our heroes to triumph. You
have kept your word at the battle of the Piave, at the combats of
San-Daniel, Tarvis, and Goritz; you have taken by assault the forts of
Malborghetto, of Prediel, and made the enemy's divisions, entrenched
in Prewald and Laybach, surrender. You had not then passed the Drave,
and already 25,000 prisoners, 60 cannon, and 10 flags signalised your
valour." This is the proclamation alluded to in this letter to
Josephine.


No. 6.

_May 29th._--The date is wrong; it should be May 19th or 24th,
probably the latter. It sets at rest the vexed question how the Danube
bridge was broken, and seems to confirm Marbot's version of a floating
mill on fire, purposely sent down by an Austrian officer of Jägers,
who won the rare order of Maria Theresa thereby--for performing _more_
than his duty. Bertrand gained his Emperor's lifelong admiration by
his expedients at this time. Everything had to be utilised--anchors
for the boat bridges were made by filling fishermen's baskets with
bullets; and a naval contingent of 1200 bluejackets from Antwerp
proved invaluable.


No. 7.

_I have ordered the two princes to re-enter France._--After so
critical a battle as the battle of Essling the Emperor's first
thoughts were concerning his succession--had he been killed or
captured. He was therefore seriously annoyed that the heir-apparent
and his younger brother had both been taken out of the country without
his permission. He therefore writes the Queen of Holland on May 28th
from Ebersdorf: "My daughter, I am seriously annoyed that you have
left France without my permission, and especially that you have taken
my nephews out of it. Since you are at Baden stay there, but an hour
after receiving the present letter send my two nephews back to
Strasburg to be near the Empress--they ought never to go out of
France. It is the first time I have had reason to be annoyed with
you, but you should not dispose of my nephews without my permission,
you should realise what a bad effect it will have. Since the waters at
Baden are doing you good you can stay there a few days, but, I repeat,
lose not a moment in sending my nephews back to Strasburg. If the
Empress is going to the waters at Plombières they may accompany her
there, but they must never pass the bridge of Strasburg.--Your
affectionate father, Napoleon." This letter passed through the hands
of Josephine at Strasburg, who was so unhappy at not having heard from
her husband that she opened it, and writes to Hortense on June 1st
when forwarding the letter: "I advise you to write to him immediately
that you have anticipated his intentions, and that your children are
with me: that you have only had them a few days in order to see them,
and to give them a change of air. The page who is announced in
Méneval's letter has not yet arrived. I hope he will bring me a letter
from the Emperor, and that at least he will not be as vexed with me
for your being at Baden. Your children have arrived in excellent
health."

_The Duke of Montebello, who died this morning._--The same day he
writes to La Maréchale as follows:--

"_Ma Cousine_,--The Marshal died this morning of the wounds that he
received on the field of honour. My sorrow equals yours. I lose the
most distinguished general in my whole army, my comrade-in-arms for
sixteen years, he whom I looked upon as my best friend. His family and
children will always have a special claim on my protection. It is to
give you this assurance that I wished to write you this letter, for I
feel that nothing can alleviate the righteous sorrow that you will
experience." The following year he bestowed the highest honour on the
Maréchale that she could receive.

_Thus everything ends._--The fourteenth bulletin says that the end was
caused by a pernicious fever, and in spite of Dr. Franck, one of the
best physicians in Europe. "Thus ends one of the most distinguished
soldiers France ever possessed."[77] He had received thirteen wounds.
The death of Lannes, and the whole of the Essling period, is best
told by Marbot. The loss of Lannes was a more serious one to Napoleon
than the whole 20,000 men lost in this battle. The master himself has
told us that "in war men are nothing, a man is everything." They could
be replaced: Lannes never. Like Kléber and Desaix, he stood on a
higher platform than the older Marshals--except Massena, who had
serious drawbacks, and who was the only one of Napoleon's best
generals that Wellington met in the Peninsula. Lannes had always the
ear of the Emperor, and always told him facts, not flattery. His life
had been specially crowded the last few weeks. Rebuked by Napoleon for
tardiness in supporting Massena at Ebersberg, his life was saved by
Napoleon himself when he was thrown from his horse into the flooded
Danube; and finally, on the field of Essling, he had under his orders
Bessières, the man who had a dozen years before prevented his
engagement to Caroline Bonaparte by tittle-tattling to Napoleon.


No. 9.

_Eugène won a battle._--The remnant of the Archduke John's army,
together with Hungarian levies, in all 31,000 men, hold the
entrenched camp and banks of the Raab. Eugène defeats it, with a
loss of 6000 men, of whom 3700 were prisoners. Napoleon, in
commemoration of the anniversary of Marengo (and Friedland) calls it
the little granddaughter of Marengo.


No. 11.

The curtain of the war's final act was rung up in the twenty-fourth
bulletin. "At length there exists no longer the Danube for the French
army; General Count Bertrand has completed works which excite
astonishment and inspire admiration. For 800 yards over the most rapid
river in the world he has, in a fortnight, constructed a bridge of
sixteen arches where three carriages can pass abreast."

_Wagram_ is, according to Pelet, the masterpiece of _tactical_
battles, while the five days' campaign (Thann to Ratisbon) was one
long _strategic_ battle. Nevertheless, respecting Wagram, had the
Archduke John, with his 40,000 men, turned up, as the Archduke had
more right to expect than Wellington had to expect Blucher, Waterloo
might have been antedated six years.

_Lasalle_ was a prime favourite of Napoleon, for his sure eye and
active bearing. His capture of Stettin with two regiments of hussars
was specially noteworthy. Like Lannes he had a strong premonition of
his death. Marbot tells a story of how Napoleon gave him 200,000
francs to get married with. A week later the Emperor asked, "When is
the wedding?" "As soon as I have got some money to furnish with,
sire." "Why, I gave you 200,000 francs to furnish with last week! What
have you done with them?" "Paid my debts with half, and lost the other
half at cards." Such an admission would have ruined any other general.
The Emperor laughed, and merely giving a sharp tug at Lasalle's
moustache, ordered Duroc to give him another 200,000.

_I am sunburnt_, and, as he writes Cambacérès the same day, tired out,
having been sixty out of the previous seventy-two hours in the
saddle.


No. 12.

_Wolkersdorf._--On July 8th he writes General Clarke: "I have the
headquarters lately occupied by the craven Francis II., who contented
himself with watching the whole affair from the top of a tower, ten
miles from the scene of battle." On this day also he dictated his
twenty-fifth bulletin, of which the last portion is so skilfully
utilised in the last scene of Act V. in L'Aiglon. One concluding
sentence is all that can here be quoted: "Such is the recital of the
battle of Wagram, a decisive and ever illustrious battle, where three
to four hundred thousand men, twelve to fifteen hundred guns, fought
for great stakes on a field of battle, studied, meditated on, and
fortified by the enemy for many months."

_A surfeit of bile._--His usual source of relief after extra work or
worry. In this case both. Bernadotte had behaved so badly at Wagram,
that Napoleon sent him to Paris with the stern rebuke, "A bungler like
you is no good to me." But as usual his anger against an old comrade
is short-lived, and he gives General Clarke permission to send
Bernadotte to command at Antwerp against the English.


No. 16.

_My affairs follow my wishes._--In Austria, possibly, but not
elsewhere. Prussia was seething with conspiracy, Russia with
ill-concealed hatred, the English had just landed in Belgium, and
Wellesley had just won Talavera. Soult was apparently no longer
trustworthy, Bernadotte a conceited boaster, who had to be publicly
snubbed (see The Order of the Day, August 5th, No. 15,614). Clarke and
Cambacérès are so slow that Napoleon writes them (August 10th) "not to
let the English come and take you in bed." Fouché shows more energy
than every one else put together, calls out National Guards, and sends
them off to meet the northern invasion. The Minister of the Interior,
M. Cretet, had just died, and the Emperor had wisely put Fouché, the
most competent man available, into his place for the time being.


No. 17.

_August 21st._--The list of birthday honours (August 15th) had been a
fairly long one, Berthier becoming Prince of Wagram, Massena of
Essling, Davoust of Eckmühl. Marshals Oudinot and Macdonald, Generals
Clarke, Reynier, Gaudin and Champagny, as also M. Maret, became Dukes.
Marmont had already, says Savary, been made delirious with the joy of
possessing a bâton.


No. 18.

_Comedians._--Napoleon found relaxation more after his own heart in
conversing with the savants of Germany, including the great mechanic
Mäelzel, with whose automaton chess-player he played a game. Constant
gives a highly-coloured picture of the sequel: "The automaton was
seated before a chess-board, and the Emperor, taking a chair opposite
the figure, said laughingly, 'Now, my friend, we'll have a game.' The
automaton, bowing, made signs for the Emperor to begin. After two or
three moves the Emperor made a wrong one on purpose; the automaton
bowed and replaced the piece on the board. His Majesty cheated again,
when the automaton bowed again, but this time took the pawn. 'Quite
right,' said his Majesty, as he promptly cheated for the third time.
The automaton then shook its head, and with one sweep of its hand
knocked all the chessmen down."

_Women ... not having been presented._--One woman, however, the
mistress of Lord Paget, was quite willing to be presented at a late
hour and to murder him at the same time--at least so says Constant.


No. 19.

_All this is very suspicious._--For perfectly natural reasons Cæsar's
wife was now above suspicion, but Cæsar himself was not so. Madame
Walewski had been more than a month at Schoenbrunn, and on May 4th,
1810, Napoleon has a second son born, who fifty years later helped to
edit his father's _Correspondence_.


No. 20.

_Krems._--He left here to review Davoust's corps on the field of
Austerlitz. Afterwards all the generals dined with him, and the
Emperor said, "This is the second time I come upon the field of
Austerlitz; shall I come to it a third time?" "Sire," replied one,
"from what we see every day none dare wager that you will not!" It was
this suppressed hatred that probably determined the Emperor to
dismantle the fortifications of Vienna, an act that intensified the
hatred of the Viennese more than his allowing the poor people to help
themselves to wood for the winter in the imperial forests had
mollified them.

_My health has never been better._--His reason for this remark is
found in his letter to Cambacérès of the same date, "They have spread
in Paris the rumour that I was ill, I know not why; I was never
better." The reason of the rumour was that Corvisart had been sent for
to Vienna, as there had been an outbreak of dysentery among the
troops. This was kept a profound secret from France, and Napoleon even
allowed Josephine to think that Corvisart had attended him (see Letter
22).


No. 23.

_October 14th._--Two days before, Stabs, the young Tugendbundist and
an admirer of Joan of Arc, had attempted to assassinate Napoleon on
parade with a carving-knife. The Emperor's letter to Fouché of the
12th October gives the most succinct account:--

"A youth of seventeen, son of a Lutheran minister of Erfurt, sought to
approach me on parade to-day. He was arrested by the officers, and as
the little man's agitation had been noticed, suspicion was aroused; he
was searched, and a dagger found upon him. I had him brought before
me, and the little wretch, who seemed to me fairly well educated, told
me that he wished to assassinate me to deliver Austria from the
presence of the French. I could distinguish in him neither religious
nor political fanaticism. He did not appear to know exactly who or
what Brutus was. The fever of excitement he was in prevented our
knowing more. He will be examined when he has cooled down and fasted.
It is possible that it will come to nothing. He will be arraigned
before a military commission.

"I wished to inform you of this circumstance in order that it may not
be made out more important than it appears to be. I hope it will not
leak out; if it does, we shall have to represent the fellow as a
madman. If it is not spoken of at all, keep it to yourself. The whole
affair made no disturbance at the parade; I myself saw nothing of it.

"_P.S._--I repeat once more, and you understand clearly, that there is
to be no discussion of this occurrence."

Count Rapp saved the Emperor's life on this occasion, and he, Savary,
and Constant, all give detailed accounts. Their narratives are a
remarkable object-lesson of the carelessness of the average
contemporary spectator in recording dates. Savary gives vaguely the
end of September, Constant October 13th, and Count Rapp October 23rd.
In the present case the date of this otherwise trivial incident is
important, for careless historians assert that it influenced Napoleon
in concluding peace. In any case it would have taken twenty such
occurrences to affect Napoleon one hairbreadth, and in the present
instance his letter of October 10th to the Russian Emperor proves that
the Peace was already settled--all but the signing.


No. 24.

_Stuttgard._--General Rapp describes this journey as follows: "Peace
was ratified. We left Nymphenburg and arrived at Stuttgard. Napoleon
was received in a style of magnificence, and was lodged in the palace
together with his suite. The King was laying out a spacious garden,
and men who had been condemned to the galleys were employed to labour
in it. The Emperor asked the King who the men were who worked in
chains; he replied that they were for the most part rebels who had
been taken in his new possessions. We set out on the following day. On
the way Napoleon alluded to the unfortunate wretches whom he had seen
at Stuttgard. 'The King of Würtemberg,' said he, 'is a very harsh man;
but he is very faithful. Of all the sovereigns in Europe he possesses
the greatest share of understanding.'

"We stopped for an hour at Rastadt, where the Princess of Baden and
Princess Stephanie had arrived for the purpose of paying their
respects to the Emperor. The Grand Duke and Duchess accompanied him as
far as Strasburg. On his arrival in that city he received despatches
which again excited his displeasure against the Faubourg St. Germain.
We proceeded to Fontainebleau; no preparations had been made for the
Emperor's reception; there was not even a guard on duty."

This was on October 26th, at 10 A.M. Méneval asserts that Napoleon's
subsequent bad temper was feigned. In any case, the meeting--that
moment so impatiently awaited--was a very bad _quart d'heure_ for
Josephine, accentuated doubtless by Fouché's report of bad conduct on
the part of the ladies of St. Germain.


FOOTNOTES

  [70] This Archduke was the "international man" at this juncture. Louis
       Bonaparte speaks of a society at Saragossa, of which the object
       was to make the Archduke Charles king of Spain.

  [71] These Adelphes or Philadelphes were the socialists or educated
       anarchists of that day. They wished for the _statu quo_ before
       Napoleon became supreme ruler. They had members in his army,
       and it seems quite probable that Bernadotte gave them passive
       support. General Oudet was their recognised head, and he died
       under suspicious circumstances after Wagram. The society was,
       unlike the Carbonari, anti-Catholic.

  [72] Pelet, vol. i. 127.

  [73] Pelet, vol. i. 282.

  [74] "Gaily asking his staff to breakfast with him" (Pelet).

  [75] Lejeune says "some hours afterwards."

  [76] Eugène's.

  [77] "What a loss for France and for me," groaned Napoleon, as he left
       his dead friend.




SERIES M


No. 1.

According to the _Correspondence of Napoleon I._, No. 16,058, the date
of this letter is December 17th. It seems, however, possible that it
is the letter written immediately after his arrival at Trianon,
referred to by Méneval, who was, in fact, responsible for it.
Thiers, working from unpublished memoirs of Hortense and Cambacérès,
gives a most interesting account of the family council, held at 9
P.M. on Friday, December 15th, at the Tuileries. Constant also
describes the scene, but gives the Empress credit for showing the
most self-command of those chiefly interested. The next day, 11 A.M.,
Count Lacépède introduced the resolutions of the family council to the
Senatus-Consultus.[78] "It is to-day that, more than ever before,
the Emperor has proved that he wishes to reign only to serve his
subjects, and that the Empress has merited that posterity should
associate her name with that of Napoleon." He pointed out that
thirteen of Napoleon's predecessors had broken the bonds of matrimony
in order to fulfil better those of sovereign, and that among these
were the most admired and beloved of French monarchs--Charlemagne,
Philip Augustus, Louis XII. and Henry IV. This speech and the Decrees
(carried by 76 votes to 7) are found in the _Moniteur_ of December
17th, which Napoleon considers sufficiently authentic to send to his
brother Joseph as a full account of what occurred, and with no
further comment of his own but that it was the step which he thought
it his duty to take. The Decrees of the Committee of the Senate
were:--"(1) The marriage contracted between the Emperor Napoleon and
the Empress Josephine is dissolved. (2) The Empress Josephine will
retain the titles and rank of a crowned Empress-Queen.[79] (3) Her
jointure is fixed at an annual revenue of £80,000 from the public
treasury.[80] (4) Every provision which may be made by the Emperor
in favour of the Empress Josephine, out of the funds of the Civil
List, shall be obligatory on his successors." They added separate
addresses to the Emperor and Empress, and that to the latter seems
worthy of quotation:--"Your Imperial and Royal Majesty is about
to make for France the greatest of sacrifices; history will preserve
the memory of it for ever. The august spouse of the greatest of
monarchs cannot be united to his immortal glory by more heroic
devotion. For long, Madame, the French people has revered your
virtues; it holds dear that loving kindness which inspires your every
word, as it directs your every action; it will admire your sublime
devotion; it will award for ever to your Majesty, Empress and
Queen, the homage of gratitude, respect, and love."

From a letter of Eugène's to his wife, quoted by Aubenas, it
appears that he, with his mother, arrived at Malmaison on Saturday
evening,[81] December 16th, and that it never ceased raining all
the next day, which added to the general depression, in spite of, or
because of, Eugène's bad puns. On the evening of the 16th Napoleon
was at Trianon, writing letters, and we cannot think that if the
Emperor had been to Malmaison on the Sunday,[82] Eugène would have
included this without comment in the "some visits" they had
received. The Emperor, as we see from the next letter, paid
Josephine a visit on the Monday.


No. 2.

The date of this is Tuesday, December 19th, while No. 3 is Wednesday
the 20th.

_Savary_, always unpopular with the Court ladies, has now nothing but
kind words for Josephine. "She quitted the Court, but the Court did
not quit her; it had always loved her, for never had any one been so
kind.... She never injured any one in the time of her power; she
protected even her enemies"--such as Fouché at this juncture, and
Lucien earlier. "During her stay at Malmaison, the highroad from Paris
to this château was only one long procession, in spite of the bad
weather; every one considered it a duty to present themselves at least
once a week." Later, Marie Louise became jealous of this, and poor
Josephine had to go to the château of Navarre, and finally to leave
France.

_Queen of Naples._--For some reason Napoleon had not wanted this
sister at Paris this winter, and had written her to this effect from
Schoenbrunn on October 15th. "If you were not so far off, and the
season so advanced, I would have asked Murat to spend two months in
Paris. But you cannot be there before December, which is a horrible
season, especially for a Neapolitan."[83] But sister Caroline, "with
the head of a Cromwell on the shoulders of a pretty woman," was not
easy to lead; and her husband had in consequence to bear the full
weight of the Emperor's displeasure. Murat's finances were in
disorder, and Napoleon wrote Champagny on December 30th to tell Murat
plainly that if the borrowed money was not returned to France, it
would be taken by main force.[84]

_The hunt._--In pouring rain, in the forest of St. Germain.


No. 4.

Thursday, December 21st, is the date.

_The weather is very damp._--Making Malmaison as unhealthy as its
very name warranted, and rendering more difficult the task which
Madame de Rémusat had set herself of resting Josephine mentally by
tiring her physically. This typical toady--Napoleon's Eavesdropper
Extraordinary--had arrived at Malmaison on December 18th. She
writes on the Friday (December 22nd), beseeching her husband to
advise the Emperor to moderate the tone of his letters, especially
this one (Thursday, December 21st), which had upset Josephine
frightfully. Surely a more harmless letter was never penned. But
it is the Rémusat all over; she lives in a chronic atmosphere of
suspicion that all her letters are read by the Emperor, and
therefore, like Stevenson's nursery rhymes, they are always written
with "one eye on the grown-up person"[85]--on the grown-up person
_par excellence_ of France and the century. The opening of letters by
the government was doubtless a blemish, which, however, Napoleon
tried to neutralise by entrusting the Post Office to his wife's
relative, Lavalette, a man whose ever-kind heart prevented this
necessary espionage degenerating into unnecessary interference
with individual rights.


No. 5.

Date probably Sunday, December 24th.

_King of Bavaria._--Eugène had gone to Meaux to meet his father-in-law,
who had put off the "dog's humour" which he had shown since the 16th.


No. 6.

Josephine had gone by special invitation to dine at the little Trianon
with Napoleon on Christmas Day, and Madame d'Avrillon says she had a
very happy day there. "On her return she told me how kind the Emperor
had been to her, that he had kept her all the evening, saying the
kindest things to her." Aubenas says, "The repast was eaten in silence
and gloom," but does not give his authority. Eugène, moreover,
confirms Madame d'Avrillon in his letter to his wife of December 26th:
"My dear Auguste, the Emperor came on Sunday to see the Empress.
Yesterday she went to Trianon to see him, and stayed to dinner. The
Emperor was very kind and amiable to her, and she seemed to be much
better. Everything points to the Empress being more happy in her new
position, and we also." On this Christmas Day Napoleon had his last
meal with Josephine.


No. 7.

_Tuileries._--His return from Trianon to this, his official residence,
made the divorce more apparent to every one.


No. 8.

_A house vacant in Paris._--This seems a hint for Josephine. She
wishes to come to Paris, to the Élysée, and to try a little diplomacy
of her own in favour of the Austrian match, and she sends secretly to
Madame de Metternich--whose husband was absent. Eugène more officially
is approaching Prince Schwartzenberg, the ambassador. Josephine, like
Talleyrand, wished to heal the schism with Rome by an Austrian
alliance; while Cambacérès, foreseeing a war with the power not allied
by marriage, would have preferred the Russian match.


No. 9.

Thursday, January 4th.

_Hortense._--Louis had tried to obtain a divorce. Cambacérès was
ordered on December 22nd to summon a family council (_New Letters of
Napoleon I._, No. 234); but the wish of the King was refused
(verbally, says Louis in his _Historical Documents of Holland_),
whereupon he refused to agree to Josephine's divorce, but had to give
way, and was present at what he calls the farewell festival given by
the city of Paris to the Empress Josephine on January 1st. The
ecclesiastical divorce was pronounced on January 12th.


No. 10.

January 5th. He duly visits Josephine the next day.


No. 11.

January 7th is the date.

_What charms your society has._--Her repertoire of small talk and
scandal. He had also lost in her his Agenda, his Journal of Paris.
Still the visits are growing rarer. This long kind letter was
doubtless intended to be specially so, for two days later the clergy
of Paris pronounced the annulment of her marriage. This was far worse
than the pronouncement by the Senate in December, as it meant to her
that she and Napoleon had never been properly married at all. The
Emperor, who hated divorces, and especially _divorcées_, had found
great difficulty in breaking down the barriers he had helped to build,
for which purpose _he_ had to be subordinated to his own Senate, _the
Pope_ to his own bishops. Seven of them allowed the annulment of the
marriage of 1804 on account of (1) its secrecy, (2) the insufficiency
of consent of the contracting parties, and (3) the absence of the
local parish priest at the ceremony. The last reason was merely a
technical one; but with respect to the first two it is only fair to
admit that Napoleon had undoubtedly, and perhaps for the only time in
his life, been completely "rushed," _i.e._ by the Pope and Josephine.
The coronation ceremony was waiting, and the Pope, secretly solicited
by Josephine, insisted on a religious marriage first and foremost. The
Pope suffered forthwith, but the other bill of costs was not exacted
till five years after date.


No. 12.

Wednesday, January 12th.

_King of Westphalia._--Madame Durand (_Napoleon and Marie Louise_)
says that, forced to abandon his wife (the beautiful and energetic
Miss Paterson) and child, Jerome "had vowed he would never have any
relations with a wife who had been thus forced upon him." For three
years he lavished his attentions upon almost all the beauties of the
Westphalian court. The queen, an eye-witness of this conduct, bore it
with mild and forbearing dignity; she seemed to see and hear nothing;
in short, her demeanour was perfect. The king, touched by her
goodness, weary of his conquests, and repentant of his behaviour, was
only anxious for an opportunity of altering the state of things.
Happily the propitious moment presented itself. The right wing of the
palace of Cassel, in which the queen's apartments were situated, took
fire; alarmed by the screams of her women the queen awoke and sprang
out of her bed, to be caught in the arms of the king and carried to a
place of safety. From that time forth the royal couple were united and
happy.


No. 13.

Saturday, January 13th.

_Sensible._--This was now possible after a month's mourning. In the
early days, according to Madame Rémusat, her mind often wandered, But
Napoleon himself encouraged the Court to visit her, and the road to
Malmaison was soon a crowded one. As the days passed, however, life
became sadly monotonous. Reading palled on Josephine, as did whist and
the daily feeding of her golden pheasants and guinea-fowls. Remained
"Patience"! Was it the "General" she played or the "Emperor," or did
she find distraction in the "Demon"?


No. 14.

_D'Audenarde._--Napoleon's handsome equerry, whom Mlle. d'Avrillon
calls "un homme superbe." His mother was Josephine's favourite _dame
du palais_. Madame Lalaing, Viscountess d'Audenarde, _née_ Peyrac, was
one of the old régime who had been ruined by the Revolution.


No. 16.

Tuesday, January 23rd.

On January 21st a Privy Council was summoned to approve of Marie
Louise as their "choice of a consort, who may give an heir to the
throne" (Thiers). Cambacérès, Fouché, and Murat wished for the Russian
princess; Lebrun, Cardinal Fesch, and King Louis for a Saxon one; but
Talleyrand, Champagny, Maret, Berthier, Fontanes were for Austria.


No. 17.

Sunday, January 28th.


No. 18.

Josephine had heard she was to be banished from Paris, and so had
asked to come to the Élysée to prove the truth or otherwise of the
rumour.

_L'Élysée._--St. Amand gives the following interesting _précis_:
"Built by the Count d'Evreux in 1718, it had belonged in succession to
the Marchioness de Pompadour, to the financier Beaujon, a Croesus of
the eighteenth century, and to the Duchesse de Bourbon. Having, under
the Revolution, become national property, it had been hired by the
caterers of public entertainments, who gave it the name of L'Élysée.
In 1803 it became the property of Murat, who, becoming King of Naples,
ceded it to Napoleon in 1808. Here Napoleon signed his second
abdication, here resided Alexander I. in 1815, and here Josephine's
grandson effected the _Coup d'État_ (1851). When the Senatus-Consultus
fixed the revenue of Josephine, Napoleon not only gave her whatever
rights he had in Malmaison, viz., at least 90 per cent. of the total
cost, but the palace of the Élysée, its gardens and dependencies, with
the furniture then in use." The latter residence was, however, for her
life only.


No. 19.

February 3rd is the date.

_L'Élysée._--After the first receptions the place is far worse than
Malmaison. Schwartzenberg, Talleyrand, the Princess Pauline, Berthier,
even her old friend Cambacérès are giving balls,[86] while the Emperor
goes nearly every night to a theatre. The carriages pass by the
Élysée, but do not stop. "It is as if the palace were in quarantine,
with the yellow flag floating."


No. 20.

_Bessières' country-house._--M. Masson says Grignon, but unless this
house is called after the château of that name in Provence, he must be
mistaken.


No. 21.

_Rambouillet._--He had taken the Court with him, and was there from
February 19th to the 23rd, the date of this letter. While there he had
been in the best of humours. On his return he finds it necessary to
write his future wife and to her father--and to pen a legible letter
to the latter gives him far more trouble than winning a battle against
the Austrians, if not assisted by General Danube.

_Adieu._--Sick and weary, Josephine returns to Malmaison, Friday,
March 9th, and even this is not long to be hers, for the new Empress
is almost already on her way. The marriage at Vienna took place on
March 11th, with her uncle Charles,[87] the hero of Essling, for
Napoleon's proxy; on the 13th she leaves Vienna, and on the 23rd
reaches Strasbourg. On the 27th she meets Napoleon at Compiègne,
spends three days with him in the château there, and arrives at St.
Cloud on April 1st, where the civil marriage is renewed, followed by
the triumphal entry into Paris, and the religious ceremony on April
2nd. This day Josephine reaches the château of Navarre.


FOOTNOTES

  [78] By here subordinating himself to the Senate, the Emperor was
       preparing a rod for his own back hereafter.

  [79] This clause gives considerable trouble to Lacépède and Regnauld.
       They cannot even find a precedent whether, if they met,
       Josephine or Marie Louise would take precedence of the other.

  [80] In addition to this, Napoleon gives her £40,000 a year from his
       privy purse, but keeps most of it back for the first two years
       to pay her 120 creditors. (For interesting details see Masson,
       _Josephine Répudiée_.)

  [81] Which agrees with Madame d'Avrillon, who says they left the
       Tuileries at 2.30. Méneval says Napoleon left for Trianon a few
       hours later. Savary writes erroneously that they left the
       following morning.

  [82] M. Masson seems to indicate a visit on December 16th, but does
       not give his authority (_Josephine Repudiée_, 114).

  [83] _Correspondence of Napoleon I._, No. 15,952.

  [84] _New Letters of Napoleon_, 1898.

  [85] Canon Ainger's comparison.

  [86] See Baron Lejeune for an interesting account of a chess quadrille
       at a dance given by the Italian Minister, Marescalchi.




SERIES N


_Navarre_, on the site of an old dwelling of Rollo the Sea-King, was
built by Jeanne of France, Queen of Navarre, Countess of Evreux. At
the time of the Revolution it belonged to the Dukes of Bouillon, and
was confiscated. In February 1810, Napoleon determined to purchase it,
and on March 10th instructed his secretary of state, Maret, to confer
the Duchy of Navarre, purchased by letters patent, on Josephine and
her heirs male. The old square building was, however, utterly unfit to
be inhabited: not a window would shut, there was neither paper nor
tapestry, all the wainscoting was rotten, draughts and damp
everywhere, and no heating apparatus.[88] What solace to know its
beautiful situation, its capabilities? No wonder if her household,
banished to such a place, sixty-five miles from the "capital of
capitals," should rebel, and secessions headed by Madame Ney become
for a time general. Whist and piquet soon grow stale in such a house
and with such surroundings, and even _trictrac_ with the old bishop of
Evreux becomes tedious. Eugène as usual brings sunshine in his path,
and helps to dispel the gloom caused by the idle gossip imported from
Paris--that Josephine is not to return to Malmaison, and the like.


No. 1.

This was Josephine's second letter, says D'Avrillon, the first being
answered _vivâ voce_ by Eugène.

_To Malmaison._--Napoleon had promised Josephine permission to return
to Malmaison, and would not recant: his new wife was, however, very
jealous of Josephine, and very much hurt at her presence at Malmaison.
Napoleon managed to be away from Paris for six weeks after Josephine's
arrival at Malmaison.


No. 1A.

_It is written in a bad style._--M. Masson, however, is loud in
its praises, and adds, "Voilà donc le protocol du tutoiement"
re-established between them in spite of the second marriage, and
their correspondence re-established on the old terms.


No. 2.

This letter seems to have been taken by Eugène to Paris, and thence
forwarded to the Emperor with a letter from that Prince in which he
enumerates Josephine's suggestions and wishes--(1) that she will not
go to Aix-la-Chapelle if other waters are suggested by Corvisart;
(2) that after stopping a few days at Malmaison she will go in June
for three months to the baths, and afterwards to the south of
France; visit Rome, Florence, and Naples incognito, spend the winter
at Milan, and return to Malmaison and Navarre in the spring of
1811; (3) that in her absence Navarre shall be made habitable, for
which fresh funds are required; (4) that Josephine wishes her
cousins the Taschers to marry, one a relative of King Joseph, the
other the Princess Amelie de la Leyen, niece of the Prince Primate.
To this Napoleon replies from Compiègne, April 26th, that the De Leyen
match with Louis Tascher may take place,[89] but that he will not
interest himself in the other (Henry) Tascher, who is giddy-headed
and bad-tempered. "I consent to whatever the Empress does, but I will
not confer any mark of my regard on a person who has behaved ill
to me. I am very glad that the Empress likes Navarre. I am giving
orders to have £12,000 which I owe her for 1810, and £12,000 for 1811
advanced to her. She will then have only the £80,000 from the public
treasury to come in.... She is free to go to whatever spa she cares
for, and even to return to Paris afterwards." He thinks, however, she
would be happier in new scenes which they had never visited together,
as they had Aix-la-Chapelle. If, however, the last are the best she
may go to them, for "what I desire above all is that she may keep
calm, and not allow herself to be excited by the gossip of Paris."
This letter goes far to soothe the poor châtelaine of Navarre.


No. 2A.

_Two letters._--The other, now missing, may have some reference to the
pictures to which he refers in his letter to Fouché the next day. "Is
it true that engravings are being published with the title of
_Josephine Beauharnais née La Pagerie_? If this is true, have the
prints seized, and let the engravers be punished" (_New Letters_, No.
253).


No. 3.

Probably written from Boulogne about the 25th. His northern tour
with Marie Louise had been very similar to one taken in 1804,
but his _entourage_ found the new bride very cold and callous
compared to Josephine. Leaving Paris on April 29th Napoleon's
_Correspondence_ till June is dated Laeken (April 30th); Antwerp
(May 3rd); Bois-le-Duc; Middleburg, Gand, Bruges, Ostend (May
20th); Lille, Boulogne, Dieppe, Le Havre, Rouen (May 31st). He
takes the Empress in a canal barge from Brussels to Malines and
himself descends the subterranean vault of the Escaut-Oise canal,
between St. Quentin and Cambrai. He is at St. Cloud on June 2nd.

Josephine has felt his wanderings less, as she has the future
Emperor, her favourite grandson, with her, the little Oui-Oui, as she
calls him, and for whom the damp spring weather of Holland was
dangerous. She was also at Malmaison from the middle of May to June
18th. The original collection of _Letters_ (Didot Frères, 1833) heads
the letter correctly to the Empress Josephine at _Malmaison_, but the
_Correspondence_, published by order of Napoleon III., gives it
erroneously, to the Empress Josephine, _at the Château of Navarre_
(No. 16,537).

_I will come to see you._--He comes for two hours on June 13th, and
makes himself thoroughly agreeable. Poor Josephine is light-headed
with joy all the evening after. The meeting of the two Empresses
is, however, indefinitely postponed, and Josephine had now no
further reason to delay her departure. Leaving her little grandson
Louis behind, she travels under the name of the Countess d'Arberg,
and she is accompanied by Madame d'Audenarde and Mlle. de Mackau, who
left the Princess Stephanie to come to Navarre. M. Masson notes that
Madame de Rémusat needs the Aix waters, and will rejoin Josephine
(within a week), under pretext of service, and thus obtain her
cure gratuitously. They go _viâ_ Lyons and Geneva to Aix-les-Bains.
M. Masson, who has recently made a careful and complete study of
this period, describes the daily round. "Josephine, on getting out
of bed, takes conscientiously her baths and douches, then, as usual,
lies down again until _déjeuner_, 11 A.M., for which the whole of the
little Court are assembled at _The Palace_--wherever she lives, and
however squalid the dwelling-place, her abode always bears this name.
Afterwards she and her women-folk ply their interminable tapestry,
while the latest novel or play (sent by Barbier from Paris) is read
aloud. And so the day passes till five, when they dress for dinner at
six; after dinner a ride. At nine the Empress's friends assemble in
her room, Mlle. de Mackau sings; at eleven every one goes to bed."
This programme, however, varies with the weather. Here is St.
Amand's version (_Dernières Années de l'Impératrice Joséphine_, p.
237): "A little reading in the morning, an airing (_le promenade_)
afterwards, dinner at eight on account of the heat, games afterwards,
and some little music; so passed existence."


No. 4.

_July 8th._--On July 5th, driving along the Chambéry road, Josephine
met the courier with a letter from Eugène describing the terrible fire
at Prince Schwartzenberg's ball, where the Princess de la Leyen,
mother of young Taschre's bride-elect, was burnt. It is noteworthy
that the Emperor makes no allusion to the conflagration. As, however,
this is the first letter since the end of May, others may have been
lost or destroyed.

_You will have seen Eugène_--_i.e._ on his way to Milan, who arrived
at Aix on July 10th. He had just been made heir to the Grand Duchy of
Frankfort--a broad hint to him and to Europe that Italy would be
eventually united to France under Napoleon's dynasty. This was the
nadir of the Beauharnais family--Josephine _repudiée_, Hortense
unqueened and unwed,[90] and Eugène's expectations dissipated, and all
within a few short months. Eugène had left his wife ill at Geneva,
whither Josephine goes to visit her the next day, duly reporting her
visit to Napoleon in her letter of July 14th (see No. 5). Geneva was
always the home of the disaffected, and so the Empress had to be
specially tactful, and the De Rémusat reports: "She speaks of the
Emperor as of a brother, of the new Empress as the one who will give
children to France, and if the rumours of the latter's condition be
correct, I am certain she will be delighted about it."

_That unfortunate daughter is coming to France_--_i.e._ to reside when
she is not at St. Leu (given to her by Napoleon) or at the waters. On
the present occasion she has been at Plombières a month or more. On
July 10th Napoleon instructs the Countess de Boubers to bring the
Grand Duke of Berg to Paris, "whom he awaits with impatience"
(_Brotonne_, 625).


No. 5.

_The conduct of the King of Holland has worried me._--This was in
March, and by May the crisis was still more acute and Napoleon's
patience exhausted. On May 20th he writes: "Before all things be a
Frenchman and the Emperor's brother, and then you may be sure you are
in the path of the true interests of Holland. Good sense and policy
are necessary to the government of states, not sour unhealthy bile."
And three days later: "Write me no more of your customary twaddle;
three years now it has been going on, and every instant proves its
falsehood! This is the last letter I shall ever write you in my
life."

Louis at one time determined on war, and rather than surrender
Amsterdam, to cut the dykes. The Emperor hears of this, summons his
brother, and practically imprisons him until he countermands the
defence of Amsterdam.

On July 1st Louis abdicated and fled to Toeplitz in Bohemia. Napoleon
is terribly grieved at the conduct of his brother, who would never
realise that the effective Continental blockade was Napoleon's last
sheet-anchor to force peace upon England.


No. 6.

_To die in a lake_--_i.e._ the Lake of Bourget, shut in by the Dent du
Chat, where a white squall had nearly capsized the sailing boat.
Josephine had been on July 26th to visit the abbey Haute-Combe, place
of sepulture of the Princes of Savoy, and the storm had overtaken her
on the return voyage.


No. 8.

_Paris, this Friday._--A very valuable note of M. Masson (_Josephine
Repudiée_, 198) enables us to fix this letter at its correct date. He
says: "It has to do with the exile of Madame de la T---- (viz., the
Princess Louis de la Trémoille), which takes place on September 28th,
1810, and this 28th September is also a Friday: there is also the
question of Mlle. de Mackau being made a baroness" (and this lady had
not joined the Court of Josephine till May 1810); "lastly, the B----
mentioned therein can only be Barante, the Prefect, whose dismissal
(from Geneva) almost coincides with this letter." It may be added
that the La Trémoille family was one of the oldest in France, allied
with the Condés, and consequently with the Bourbons. Barante's fault
had been connivance at the letters and conduct of Madame de Staël.


No. 9.

_The only suitable places ... are either Milan or Navarre._--Milan had
been her own suggestion conveyed by Eugène, but Napoleon, two months
later, had told her she could spend the winter in France, and in spite
of danger signals ("inspired by diplomacy rather than devotion" [91])
from Madame de Rémusat (in her fulsome and tedious "despatch" sent
from Paris in September, and probably inspired by the Emperor himself)
she manages to get to Navarre, and even to spend the first fortnight
of November at Malmaison. Before leaving Switzerland Josephine refuses
to risk an interview with Madame de Staël. "In the first book she
publishes she will not fail to report our conversation, and heaven
knows how many things she will make me say that I have never even
thought of."


No. 10.

In spite of the heading Josephine was at Malmaison on this day, and
Napoleon writes Cambacérès: "My cousin, the Empress Josephine not
leaving for Navarre till Monday or Tuesday, I wish you to pay her a
visit. You will let me know on your return how you find her"
(_Brotonne_,721). The real reason is to hasten her departure, and she
gets to Navarre November 22nd (Thursday).

_The Empress progresses satisfactorily._--Napoleon writes to this
effect to her father, the Emperor of Austria, on the same day: "The
Empress is very well.... It is impossible that the wife for whom I am
indebted to you should be more perfect. Moreover, I beg your Majesty
to rest assured that she and I are equally attached to you."


FOOTNOTES

  [87] On this occasion Baron Lejeune sees the Archduke Charles, and
       remarks: "There was nothing in his quiet face with its grave
       and gentle expression, or in his simple, modest, unassuming
       manner, to denote the mighty man of war; but no one who met his
       eyes could doubt him to be a genius."

  [88] "This gloomy and forsaken château," says St. Amand, "whose only
       attraction was the half-forgotten memory of its vanished
       splendours, was a fit image of the woman who came to seek
       sanctuary there."

  [89] He endows the husband with £4000 a year, and the title of Count
       Tascher.

  [90] "Une épouse sans époux, et une reine sans royaume"--St. Amand.

  [91] Aubenas.




SERIES O


No. 1.

_The New Year._--On this occasion, instead of her usual gifts
(_étrennes_) she organised a lottery of jewels, of which Madame
Ducrest gives a full account. Needless to say, Josephine worked the
oracle so that every one got a suitable gift--including the old Bishop
(see next note).

_More women than men._--The Bishop of Evreux (Mgr. Bourlier) was the
most welcome guest. He amused Josephine, and although eighty years of
age, could play _trictrac_ and talk well on any subject. Madame de
Rémusat wrote her husband concerning him, "We understand each other
very well, he and I."

_Keep well._--At Navarre Josephine lost her headaches, and put on
flesh.


No. 2.

There is a full account of the birth of the King of Rome in Napoleon's
letter to the Emperor of Austria on March 20 (No. 17,496). The letter
of this date to Josephine is missing, but is referred to by
D'Avrillon. It began, "My dear Josephine, I have a son. I am _au
comble de bonheur_."

_Eugène._--Josephine much appreciated this allusion. "Is it possible,"
she said, "for any one to be kinder than the Emperor, and more anxious
to mitigate whatever might be painful for me at the present moment, if
I loved him less sincerely? This association of my son with his own is
well worthy of him who, when he likes, is the most fascinating of all
men." She gave a costly ring to the page who brought the letter.

On the previous day Eugène had arrived at Navarre,--sent by the
Emperor. "You are going to see your mother, Eugène; tell her I am sure
that she will rejoice more than any one at my happiness. I should have
already written to her if I had not been absorbed by the pleasure of
watching my boy. The moments I snatch from his side are only for
matters of urgent necessity. This event, I shall acquit myself of the
most pleasant of them all by writing to Josephine."


No. 4.

Written in November 1811.

_As fat as a good Normandy farmeress._--Madame d'Abrantès, who saw her
about this time, writes: "I observed that Josephine had grown very
stout[92] since the time of my departure for Spain. This change was at
once for the better and the worse. It imparted a more youthful
appearance to her face; but her slender and elegant figure, which had
been one of her principal attractions, had entirely disappeared. She
had now decided _embonpoint_, and her figure had assumed that matronly
air which we find in the statues of Agrippina, Cornelia, &c. Still,
however, she looked uncommonly well, and she wore a dress which became
her admirably. Her judicious taste in these matters contributed to
make her appear young much longer than she otherwise would. The best
proof of the admirable taste of Josephine is the marked absence of
elegance shown by Marie Louise, though both Empresses employed the
same milliners and dressmakers, and Marie Louise had a large sum
allotted for the expenses of her toilet."

St. Amand says that 1811 was for Josephine a happy year, compared to
those which followed.




SERIES P


No. 1.

Written from Konigsberg (M. Masson, in _Josephine Repudiée_, says
Dantzig; but on June 11th Napoleon writes to Eugène, "I shall be at
Konigsberg to-morrow," where his correspondence is dated from
henceforward). A day or two later he writes the King of Rome's
governess that he trusts to hear soon that the fifteen months old
child has cut his first four teeth.


No. 2.

_Gumbinnen, June 20th._--From this place and on this date goes forth
the first bulletin of the _Grande Armée_. It gives a _résumé_ of the
causes of the war, dating from the end of 1810, when English influence
again gained ascendency.

On July 29th he writes Hortense from Witepsk to congratulate her on
her eldest son's recovery from an illness. A week later he writes his
librarian for some amusing novels--new ones for choice, or old ones
that he has not read--or good memoirs.

Josephine meanwhile has permission to go to Italy. Owing to her
grandson's illness she defers starting till July 16th. Through
frightful weather she reaches Milan _viâ_ Geneva on July 28th, and has
a splendid reception. On the 29th she writes to Hortense: "I have
found the three letters from Eugène, the last one dated the 13th; his
health is excellent. He still pursues the Russians, without being able
to overtake them. It is generally hoped the campaign may be a short
one. May that hope be realised!" Two days later she announces the
birth of Eugène's daughter Amelia, afterwards Empress of Brazil.
Towards the end of August Josephine goes to Aix and meets the Queen of
Spain with her sister Desirée Bernadotte, the former "kind and amiable
as usual," the latter "very gracious to me"--rather a new experience.
From Aix she goes to Prégny-la-Tour, on the Lake of Geneva, and shocks
the good people in various ways, says M. Masson, especially by
innuendoes against Napoleon; and he adds, "if one traces back to their
source the worst calumnies against the morals of the Emperor, it is
Josephine that one encounters there." She gets to Malmaison October
24th. Soon after his return from Moscow Napoleon pays her a visit, and
about this time she begins to see the King of Rome, whose mother has
always thought more of her daily music and drawing lessons than of
whether she was making her son happy or not.

1812 closed in gloom, but 1813 was in itself terribly ominous to so
superstitious a woman as Josephine. Thirteen is always unlucky, and
moreover the numbers of 1813 add up to 13; also the doom-dealing year
began on a Friday. Every one felt the hour approaching. As Napoleon
said at St. Helena: "The star grew pale; I felt the reins slipping
from my hand, and I could do no more. A thunderbolt could alone have
saved us, and every day, by some new fatality or other, our chances
diminished. Sinister designs began to creep in among us; fatigue and
discouragement had won over the majority; my lieutenants became lax,
clumsy, careless, and consequently unfortunate; they were no longer
the men of the commencement of the Revolution, nor even of the time of
my good fortune. The chief generals were sick of the war; I had gorged
them too much with my high esteem, with too many honours and too much
wealth. They had drunk from the cup of pleasure, and wished to enjoy
peace at any price. _The sacred fire was quenched._"

Up to August Fortune had smiled again upon her favourite. With
conscripts for infantry and without cavalry he had won Lutzen,
Bautzen, and Dresden; and even so late as September Byron was writing
that "bar epilepsy and the elements he would back Napoleon against the
field." But treachery and incompetence had undermined the Empire, and
Leipsic (that battle of giants, where 110,000 soldiers were killed and
wounded) made final success hopeless. In 1814 his brothers Lucien and
Louis rallied to him, and Hortense was for the only time proud of her
husband. She thinks if he had shown less suspicion and she less pride
they might have been happy after all. "My husband is a good Frenchman
... he is an honest man." Meanwhile, Talleyrand is watching to guide
the _coup de grâce_. Napoleon makes a dash for Lorraine to gather his
garrisons and cut off the enemy's supplies. The Allies hesitate and
are about to follow him, as per the rules of war. Talleyrand, the only
man who could ever divine Napoleon, sends them the message, "You can
do everything, and you dare nothing; dare therefore _once_!" Hortense
is the only _man_ left in Paris, and in vain she tries to keep Marie
Louise, whose presence would have stimulated the Parisians to hold the
Allies at bay. It is in vain. Unlike Prussia or Austria who fought
for months, or Spain who fought for years, after their capitals were
taken:--

  "Like Nineveh, Carthage, Babylon and Rome,
  France yields to the conqueror, vanquished at home."

After Marmont's betrayal Napoleon attempts suicide, and when he
believes death imminent sends a last message to Josephine by
Caulaincourt, "You will tell Josephine that my thoughts were of her
before life departed."

It was on Monday, May 23rd, that Josephine's illness commenced, after
receiving at dinner the King of Prussia and his sons (one afterwards
Wilhelm der Greise, first Emperor of Germany). Whether the sore throat
which killed her was a quinsy or diphtheria[93] is difficult to prove,
but the latter seems the more probable. Corvisart, who was himself ill
and unable to attend, told Napoleon that she died of grief and worry.
Before leaving for the Waterloo campaign Napoleon visited Malmaison,
and there, as Lord Rosebery reminds us, allowed his only oblique
reproach to Marie Louise to escape him: "Poor Josephine. Her death, of
which the news took me by surprise at Elba, was one of the most acute
griefs of that fatal year, 1814. She had her failings, of course; _but
she, at any rate, would never have abandoned me_."


FOOTNOTES

  [92] Mlle. d'Avrillon says that during the Swiss voyage Josephine
       found it desirable, for the first time, to "wear whalebone in
       her corsets."

  [93] The same question may be asked respecting the death of
       Montaigne.




APPENDIX (1)

A REPUTED POEM BY NAPOLEON I.


LE CHIEN, LE LAPIN, ET LE CHASSEUR.

FABLE.--_Composée a l'âge de 13 ans, par_ NAPOLEON I.

      César, chien d'arrêt renommé,
      Mais trop enflé de son mérite,
      Tennait arrêté dans son gîte
  Un malheureux lapin de peur inanimé.
  "Rends-toi!" lui cria-t-il, d'une voix de tonerre
  Qui fit au loin trembler les peuplades des bois.
  "Je suis César, connu par ses exploits,
  Et dont le nom remplit toute la terre."
      A ce grand nom, Jeannot Lapin,
  Recommandant a Dieu son âme pénitente,
      Demande d'une voix tremblante:
      "Trés-sérénissime mâtin,
  Si je me rends quel sera mon destin?"
  "Tu mourras." "Je mourrai!" dit la bête innocente.
  "Et si je fuis?" "Ton trépas est certain."
  "Quoi!" reprit l'animal qui se nourrit de thym,
  "Des deux côtés je dois perdre la vie!
      Que votre auguste seigneurie
  Veuille me pardonner, puisqu'il me faut mourir,
      Si j'ose tenter de m'enfuir."
  Il dit, et fuit en héros de garenne.
  Caton l'aurait blamé; je dis qu'il n'eut pas tort.
      Car le chasseur le voit à peine
  Qu'il l'ajuste, le tire--et le chien tombe mort
  Que dirait de ceci notre bon La Fontaine?
      Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera.
      I'approuve fort cette méthode-là.




APPENDIX (2)

GENEALOGY OF THE BONAPARTE FAMILY


Many more or less fictitious genealogies of the Bonapartes have been
published, some going back to mythical times. The first reliable
record, however, seems to be that of a certain Bonaparte of Sarzana,
in Northern Italy, an imperial notary, who was living towards the end
of the thirteenth century, and from whom both the Corsican and the
Trevisan or Florentine Bonapartes claim their origin. From him in
direct line was descended Francois de Sarzana, who was sent to Corsica
in 1509 to fight for the Republic of Genoa. His son Gabriel, having
sold his patrimony in Italy, settled in Ajaccio, where he bore the
honourable title of Messire, and where, being left a widower, he
assumed the tonsure and died Canon of the cathedral.

From him an unbroken line of Bonapartes, all of whom in turn were
elected to the dignity of Elder of Ajaccio, brings us to Charles
Bonaparte Napoleon, father of the Emperor.




APPENDIX (3)

  REPUTED LETTERS OF NAPOLEON TO JOSEPHINE. TAKEN FROM THE MEMOIRS
  OF MADAME DUCREST.


The author asked the advice of Monsieur Frédéric Masson about
these Letters, to which he at once received the courteous reply, "Il
faut absolument rejeter les Lettres publiées par Regnault Varin[94] et
reproduites par Georgette Ducrest; pas une n'est authentique." No one
who has read much of Napoleon's correspondence can in fact believe for
a moment in their authenticity. They are interesting, however, as
showing the sort of stuff which went to form our grandfathers'
fallacies about the relations of Napoleon and Josephine. Madame
Ducrest occasionally played and sang for Josephine after the
divorce. Her father was a nephew of Madame de Genlis. Madame
Ducrest married a musical composer, M. Bochsa, the then celebrated
author of _Dansomanie_ and _Noces de Gamache_. He afterwards
deserted her, and her voice having completely failed, she was
compelled to write her Memoirs to earn sustenance thereby. Of these
Memoirs M. Masson has said,[95] that "in the midst of apocryphal
documents, uncontroverted anecdotes, impossible situations, are yet
to be found some first-hand personal observations."


No. 1.--1796.

FROM GENERAL BONAPARTE TO HIS WIFE.

My first laurel, my love, must be for my country; my second shall be
for you. While beating Alvinzi I thought of France; when I had
defeated him I thought of you. Your son will present to you a standard
which he received from Colonel Morbach, whom he made prisoner with his
own hands. Our Eugène, you see, is worthy of his father; and I trust
you do not think me an unworthy successor of the great and unfortunate
general, under whom 1 should have been proud to learn to conquer. I
embrace you.

  BONAPARTE.


No. 2.--1804.

TO GENERAL BONAPARTE.

I have read over your letter, my dear, perhaps for the tenth time, and
I must confess that the astonishment it caused me has given way only
to feelings of regret and alarm. You wish to raise up the throne of
France, and that, not for the purpose of seating upon it those whom
the Revolution overthrew, but to place yourself upon it. You say, how
enterprising, how grand and, above all, useful is this design; but I
should say, how many obstacles oppose its execution, what sacrifices
will its accomplishment demand, and when realised, how incalculable
will be its results? But let us suppose that your object were already
attained, would you stop at the foundation of the new empire? That new
creation, being opposed by neighbouring states, would stir up war with
them and perhaps entail their ruin. Their neighbours, in their turn,
will not behold it without alarm or without endeavouring to gratify
their revenge by checking it. And at home, how much envy and
dissatisfaction will arise; how many plots must be put down, how many
conspiracies punished! Kings will despise you as an upstart, subjects
will hate you as an usurper, and your equals will denounce you as a
tyrant. None will understand the necessity of your elevation; all will
attribute it to ambition or pride. You will not want for slaves to
crouch beneath your authority until, seconded by some more formidable
power, they rise up to oppose you; happy will it be if poison or the
poignard!... But how can a wife, a friend dwell on these dreadful
anticipations!

This brings my thoughts back to myself, about whom I should care but
little were my personal interests alone concerned. But will not the
throne inspire you with the wish to contract new alliances? Will you
not seek to support your power by new family connections? Alas!
whatever those connections may be, will they compensate for those
which were first knit by corresponding fitness, and which affection
promised to perpetuate? My thoughts linger on the picture which
fear--may I say love, traces in the future. Your ambitious project has
excited my alarm; console me by the assurance of your moderation.


No. 3.--_December 1809._

TO THE EMPEROR.

My forebodings are realised! You have just pronounced the word which
separates us for ever; the rest is nothing more than mere formality.
Such, then, is the result, I shall not say of so many sacrifices (they
were light to me, since they had you for their object), but of an
unbounded friendship on my part and of the most solemn oaths on yours!
It would be a consolation for me if the state which you allege as your
motive were to repay my sacrifice by justifying your conduct! But that
public consideration which you urge as the ground for deserting me is
a mere pretence on your part. Your mistaken ambition has ever been,
and will continue to be, the guide of all your actions, a guide which
has led you to conquests and to the assumption of a crown, and is now
driving you on to disasters and to the brink of a precipice.

You speak of the necessity of contracting an alliance, of giving an
heir to your empire, of founding a dynasty! But with whom are you
about to form an alliance? with the natural enemy of France, that
artful house of Austria, whose detestation of our country has its rise
in its innate feelings, in its system, in the laws of necessity. Do
you believe that this hatred, of which she has given us such abundant
proof, more particularly for the last fifty years, has not been
transferred by her from the kingdom of France to the French empire?
That the children of Maria Theresa, that skilful sovereign, who
purchased from Madame de Pompadour the fatal treaty of 1756, which you
never mention without shuddering; do you imagine, I repeat, that her
posterity, when inheriting her power, has not also inherited her
spirit? I am merely repeating what you have so often said to me; but
at that time your ambition was satisfied with humbling a power which
you now find it convenient to restore to its former rank. Believe me,
as long as you shall exercise a sway over Europe, that power will be
submissive to you; but beware of reverses of fortune.

As to the necessity of an heir, I must speak out, at the risk of
appearing in the character of a mother prejudiced in favour of her
son; ought I, in fact, to be silent when I consider the interests of
one who is my only delight, and upon whom alone you had built all your
hopes? That adoption of the 12th of January 1806 was then another
political falsehood! Nevertheless the talents, the virtues of my
Eugène are no illusion. How often have you not spoken in his praise? I
may say more; you thought it right to reward him by the gift of a
throne, and have repeatedly said that he was deserving of greater
favours. Well, then! France has frequently re-echoed these praises;
but you are now indifferent to the wishes of France.

I say nothing to you at present of the person who is destined to
succeed me, and you do not expect that I should make any allusion to
this subject. You might suspect the feelings which dictated my
language; nevertheless, you can never doubt of the sincerity of my
wishes for your happiness; may it at least afford me some consolation
for my sufferings. Great indeed will be that happiness if it should
ever bear any proportion to them!


No. 4.

PART OF A LETTER SAID TO BE DATED BRIENNE, 1814.

"... On revisiting this spot, where I passed my youthful days, and
contrasting the peaceful condition I then enjoyed with the state of
terror and agitation to which my mind is now a prey, often have I
addressed myself in these words: 'I have sought death in numberless
engagements; I can no longer dread its approach; I should now hail it
as a boon ... nevertheless, I could still wish to see Josephine once
more!'"


No. 5.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

  _Fontainebleau, 16th April 1814_.

_My dear Josephine_,--I wrote to you on the 8th instant (it was on a
Friday). You have perhaps not received my letter; fighting was still
going on; it is possible that it may have been stopped on its way. The
communications must now be re-established. My determination is taken;
I have no doubt of this note coming to your hands.

I do not repeat what I have already told you. I then complained of my
situation; I now rejoice at it. My mind and attention are relieved
from an enormous weight; my downfall is great, but it is at least said
to be productive of good.

In my retreat I intend to substitute the pen for the sword. The
history of my reign will gratify the cravings of curiosity. Hitherto,
I have only been seen in profile; I will now show myself in full to
the world. What facts have I not to disclose! how many men are
incorrectly estimated! I have heaped favours upon a countless number
of wretches; what have they latterly done for me?

They have all betrayed me, one and all, save and except the excellent
Eugène, so worthy of you and of me. May he ever enjoy happiness under
a sovereign fully competent to appreciate the feelings of nature and
of honour!

Adieu, my dear Josephine; follow my example and be resigned. Never
dismiss from your recollection one who has never forgotten, and never
will forget you! Farewell, Josephine.

  NAPOLEON.

_P.S._--I expect to hear from you when I shall have reached the island
of Elba. I am far from being in good health.


FOOTNOTES

  [94] _Memoires et Correspondance de l'Impératrice Joséphine_, par _J.
       B. J. Innocert Philadelphe Regnault Varin_. Paris, 1820, 8^o.
       This book is not in the British Museum Catalogue.

  [95] _Josephine Impératrice et Reine_, Paris, 1899.




INDEX OF PERSONS

_Excluding_ NAPOLEON _and_ JOSEPHINE, _which occur on nearly every
page_.


  Abercromby, Sir Ralph, 49

  Abrantès, Mdme. Junot, Duchesse d', 190, 199, 229, 230, 231, 242, 247,
        254, 261, 265, 266, 278, 312

  Achille. (_See_ Murat)

  Agrippina, 312

  Ainger, Canon, 298

  Albufera, Duke of. (_See_ Suchet)

  Aldobrandini, Prince, 149

  Alexander the Great, 185

  Alison, Sir A. (historian), 74, 119, 255, 264, 272, 286

  Alvinzi, Marshal, 30, 34, 35, 218, 221, 318

  Amand, Saint, _see_ S. Imbert de (author), 4, 172, 199, 212, 221, 223,
        243, 245, 251, 256, 257, 267, 269, 302, 304, 307, 308, 312

  Amelia (daughter of Eugène), 313

  Angoulême, Duc d', 190, 196, 197

  Anhalt, Prince of, 270

  Arberg, Mdme. d', 176

  Arch-Chancellor. (_See_ Cambacérès)

  Argenteau, D', 9

  Arnault (author), 212

  Artois, Comte d', 196, 197

  Aubenas, 172, 200, 201, 216, 225, 226, 228, 241, 257, 259, 260, 297,
        299

  Audenarde, D', 162, 302
  ----  Madame Lalaing, Viscountess d', 302, 307

  Augereau, Marshal, 24, 38, 57, 70, 90, 154, 196, 214, 254, 255, 267

  Auguié, Mlle. Aglaé Louise, 231

  Auguste, Princess of Bavaria (then wife of Eugène). (_See_ Beauharnais,
        Auguste)

  Augustus, Emperor, 52, 228

  Austria, Emperor of, 186, 197, 218, 223, 240
  ----  Empress of, 186

  Avrillon, Mlle, d', 82, 174, 225, 233, 256, 297, 299, 302, 305, 311,
        312


  Baccioli, Eliza (Bonaparte), 63, 122

  Baden, Princess Wilhelmina of, 77, 236, 295
  ----  Grand Duchess of. (_See_ Beauharnais, Stephanie)
  ----  Prince of, 242, 243, 245, 270

  Bagration, General, 187, 188

  Baird, General Sir David, 42, 49, 143

  Bajazet, 272

  Barante, De (Prefect of Geneva), 309, 310

  Barbier (Napoleon's librarian), 307

  Barras, Count de, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 38, 199, 205, 207, 221, 247, 248

  Bathurst, Benj., 154

  Bausset (Prefect of Imperial Palace), 267, 269, 273

  Bavaria, Elector, then King of, 77, 122, 144, 159, 161, 242, 243, 265,
        266, 270, 299
  ----  Electress, then Queen of, 70, 161, 243, 265
  ----  Prince Royal of, 281

  Bayard, Chevalier, 235, 243

  Beauharnais, Eugène (Viceroy of Italy), 6, 21, 31, 44, 51, 58, 59, 60,
        63, 66, 68, 78, 106, 121, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
        150, 152, 159, 162, 164, 170, 171, 172, 179, 187, 188, 189, 190,
        191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 216, 224, 228, 229, 234, 242,
        243, 244, 254, 256, 264, 265, 266, 276, 277, 282, 286, 287, 290,
        297, 299, 305, 308, 310, 311, 312, 313, 318, 320, 321

  Beauharnais, Auguste (wife of Eugène), 121, 186, 242, 264, 265, 266,
        299
  ----  Hortense, 6, 10, 11, 12, 31, 44, 50, 51, 52, 53, 59, 66, 68, 78,
        79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 93, 111, 112, 113, 127,
        137, 140, 144, 147, 149, 150, 151, 159, 160, 165, 172, 173, 175,
        176, 180, 216, 226, 227, 228, 229, 231, 235, 237, 244, 247, 254,
        259, 261, 262, 263, 268, 269, 288, 289, 296, 300, 308, 313, 314
  ----  Stephanie, 78, 80, 82, 84, 85, 86, 89, 242, 243, 244, 254, 271,
        295
  ----  Fanny (daughter of Count), 243

  Beaujon (financier), 302

  Beaulieu, General, 6, 7, 10, 11, 38, 204, 205, 208, 209

  Becker, General, 81

  Bellegarde, General, 49, 195, 197

  Bennigsen or Beningsen, General, 90, 188, 193, 254

  Bentinck, General, 193

  Bentley, 227

  Berg, Napoleon Louis, Grand Duke of, 82, 137, 144, 147, 148, 150, 172,
        173, 263, 308

  Bernadotte, Marshal, 38, 41, 57, 80, 81, 83, 95, 106, 113, 174, 185,
        188, 192, 193, 246, 254, 255, 257, 279, 291, 292
  ----  Desirée (_née_ Clary), 38, 246, 313

  Berthier, Marshal, 33, 57, 141, 214, 224, 229, 246, 251, 259, 265, 270,
        280, 292, 302, 303

  Bertrand, General, 259, 287, 288, 290

  Bessières, Marshal, 57, 106, 128, 136, 139, 149, 165, 190, 260, 290,
        303

  Bignon, Baron (historian), 55, 75, 255, 258, 262

  Billington, Mistress, 224

  Bingham, Captain D. A., 204, 208, 256

  Blake (Field-Marshal and Spanish General), 135, 136, 148, 181

  Blucher, Field-Marshal, 83, 192, 193, 194, 195, 246, 250, 278, 291

  Bonaparte, Joseph (King of Spain), 21, 38, 77, 128, 143, 150, 187, 191,
        196, 199, 200, 201, 228, 237, 258, 265, 266, 273, 296, 305
  ----  Louis, 50, 53, 59, 77, 172, 173, 214, 220, 228, 261, 263, 268,
        269, 279, 300, 302, 308, 309, 314
  ----  Jerome (King of Westphalia), 117 118, 160, 161, 242, 261, 270,
        301
  ----  Lucien, 228, 229, 230, 247, 253, 265, 266, 297, 314
  ----  Caroline. (_See_ Murat, Madame)
  ----  Eliza. (_See_ Lucca, Princess of)

  Bonaparte Family, The, 317. (Appendix 2)

  Bonpland, Aimé, 226

  Borghèse, Prince, 99, 115
  ----  Pauline, 99, 303

  Boubers, Countess de, 308

  Bouillet (lexicographer), 74, 248

  Bouillon, Duke of, 304

  Bourbon, Duchesse de, 302

  Bourlier, Bishop of Evreux, 311

  Bourrienne, L. de, 30, 31, 61, 155, 226, 228, 229, 230, 237, 239

  Boyer (French general, "Pierre le Cruel"), 196

  Brizzi, 89

  Brock, General, 187

  Brotonne, L. de, 190, 238, 260, 310

  Browning, Oscar, 47

  Bruix, Admiral, 232

  Brune, Marshal, 34, 41, 43, 49, 57, 118, 221

  Brunswick, Duke of, 245

  Brutus, 294

  Bulow, General von, 192, 194, 196

  Burdett-Coutts, Mr., 218

  Burke, Edmund, 38

  Buxhowden, General, 72, 90

  Byron, Lord, 183, 314

  "B----" (probably Bourrienne), 60, 175


  Cabarrus, M. de, 248

  Cadoudal, Georges (Vendéen chief and conspirator), 57

  Cæsar, Julius, 232, 281, 286, 293

  Calder, Sir Robert, 63

  Cambacérès, Arch-Chancellor, 108, 114, 150, 188, 192, 236, 269, 271,
        281,
  284, 291, 292, 293, 296, 300, 302, 303, 310

  Campan, Madame, 191, 242

  Caracci, 209

  Carnot (member of the Directory and "organiser of victory"), 200, 204,
        205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 217, 223

  Castaños, General, Duke of Baylen, 136

  Cathcart, Lord, 188

  Caulaincourt, Duke of Vicenza, 1, 270, 315.

  Cesarotti, 199

  Chabot, 219

  Chabran, 219

  Chambry, M., 58

  Champagny, De (Duc de Cadore), 153, 262, 270, 271, 292, 298, 302

  Championnet, General, 42

  Charlemagne, 234, 296

  Charles, Archduke, 19, 25, 34, 38, 42, 46, 66, 68, 143, 144, 145, 149,
        242, 279, 280, 282, 284, 304

  Charles, Prince. (_See_ Charles, Archduke)

  Charles XII., 185. (_See_ Sweden, King of)

  Chauvet, 7, 199, 200

  Chimay, Prince de, 248

  Clarke, General, 196, 210, 221, 291, 292

  Clary, Desirée. (_See_ Bernadotte, Desirée).

  Coburg, Prince of, 270

  Cockburn, Admiral, 191

  Colburn, 229

  Colombier, Mlle. du, 224

  Conches, Baron Feuillet de, 13

  Constant, 229, 230, 232, 233, 236, 254, 265, 267, 268, 284, 292, 293,
        294, 296

  Corbineau, Constant (one of three brothers, known as les trois Horaces),
        98, 99, 256

  Corneille, 241

  Cornelia, 312

  Cornwallis, Lord, 41

  Correggio, 205, 209

  Corvisart, Baron, 52, 153, 233, 293, 305, 315

  Courland, Duchess of, 270

  Crassus, 185

  Crétet, Count, 292

  Cromwell, Oliver, 298

  Czartoriski, Prince, 241


  Dahlmann, General, 98, 256

  Dantzic, Duke of. (_See_ Lefebvre, Marshal)

  Darius, 185

  Darmagnac, General, 98

  Darmstadt, Prince of, 270

  Daru, Count, 256, 257

  David, King, 262

  Davidowich, Baron (Austrian General), 27, 30

  Davoust, Marshal, 44, 57, 69, 80, 81, 84, 89, 143, 187, 246, 247, 255,
        282, 292, 293

  Decazes, Duke, 269

  Decrès, Vice-Admiral, Minister of Marine, 225, 254, 256

  Delille, Abbé, 190

  Desaix, General, 14, 41, 42, 44, 46, 290

  Despinois, General, 215

  Dessalines ("James I."), of Hayti, 60

  Didot, 172

  Dietrich, Mdme. de, 240

  Don Carlos, Infant, 126

  Ducrest, Madame, 311, 317, 318

  Duesberg (botanist), 225

  Dumas, Matthieu, Count (General and historian), 255, 257, 258

  Duphot, General, 38

  Dupont, General, 65, 69, 101, 128, 267

  Dupuis, 104, 260

  Dupuy, 219

  Durand, Madame, 301

  Duroc, Marshal, 191, 228, 230, 252, 270, 275, 291


  Edward, the Black Prince, 222

  Elchingen, Duke of. (_See_ Ney, Marshal)

  "Eleanore," 252

  Enghien, Duc d', 57, 236, 276

  England, King George II. of, 43
  ----  King George III. of, 43, 46, 64, 70, 218, 223, 238

  Estève (General Treasurer of the Crown), 161

  Eugène, Prince of Savoy, 286

  Eugénie, Empress, 256
  ----  Hortense, Princess, 277

  Evreux, Count d', 302


  Faipoult, Citizen, 204

  Ferdinand, Archduke, 143, 147, 279
  ----  Prince of Asturias (afterwards Ferdinand VII.), 118, 123, 125, 126,
        127, 128, 194, 195, 196, 266, 268, 269

  Fesch, Cardinal, 302

  Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, 41

  Fontanès, Marquis de, 302

  Fouché (de Nantes, Duke of Otranto), 236, 259, 261, 262, 274, 275,
        276, 277, 279, 292, 294, 295, 297, 302, 306

  Fox, C. J., 77

  Foy, General, 191, 196

  Francis II., Emperor of Austria (and Germany), 71, 77, 128, 291, 310,
        311

  Franck, Doctor, 289

  Frederick the Great, 67, 249, 283, 286

  Frederick I. (Duke, Elector, and King of Wurtemberg), 238

  Frederick William II., 38. (_See_ Prussia, King of)

  Frederick William III., 38. (_See_ Prussia, King of)

  Friand, General, 185

  Fulton, Robert, 235


  Gaudin, Duke of Gaeta, 292

  Genlis, Mdme. de, 318

  George II. (_See_ England, King of)

  George III. (_See_ England, King of)

  Georges. (_See_ Cadoudal)

  Germany, Emperor of. (_See_ Austria, Emperor of)

  Gillray, James, 248

  Giraudin, Stanislaus, 261

  Godoy, Don Manuel, Prince of the Peace, 77, 123, 125

  Goethe, J. W. Von, 177, 270

  Gohier, Louis (member of the Directory), 43

  Graham, Colonel, 35, 192, 214, 215

  Gros, Baron (artist), 220, 221

  Guesclin, Bertrand du, 235


  Hamilton, Lady, 249

  Harpe, General La. (_See_ Laharpe, General)

  Harville, M. d', 70

  Hatzfeld, Princess d', 83, 249

  Haugwitz, Count von, 71

  Hautpoult, General, 255

  Haydn, Joseph, 74, 90

  Heath, Baron, 60

  Hédouville, General, 42, 92

  Henri IV., 296

  Hiller, General, 282, 284

  Hoche, General Lazare, 34, 38, 209, 218

  Hofer, Andreas, 146

  Hohenlohe, Prince, 81

  Hohenzollern-Hechingen, Prince of, 277

  Holland, King of. (_See_ Bonaparte, Louis)
  ----  Queen of. (_See_ Beauharnais, Hortense)

  Homer, 199

  Hood, Robin, 39

  Humbert, General, 41

  Humboldt, Baron von, 226

  Hume, Martin, 267

