
No. 33.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MAYENCE.

  _Warsaw, January 19, 1807._

_My Dear_,--Your letter to hand. I have laughed at your fear of fire.
I am in despair at the tone of your letters and at what I hear. I
forbid you to weep, to be petulant and uneasy; I want you to be
cheerful, lovable, and happy.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 34.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MAYENCE.

  _Warsaw, January 23, 1807._

Your letter of January 15th to hand. It is impossible to allow women
to make such a journey as this--bad roads, miry and unsafe. Return to
Paris; be cheerful and content there. Perhaps even I shall soon be
there. I have laughed at what you say about your having taken a
husband to be with him. I thought, in my ignorance, that the wife was
made for the husband, the husband for his country, his family, and
glory. Pardon my ignorance; one is always learning from our fair
ladies.

Adieu, my dear. Think how much it costs me not to send for you. Say to
yourself, "It is a proof how precious I am to him."

  NAPOLEON.


No. 35.

  _January 25th.--Russians defeated at Mohrungen by Bernadotte._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MAYENCE.

  _January 25, 1807._

I am very unhappy to see you are in pain. I hope that you are at
Paris; you will get better there. I share your griefs, and do not
groan. For I could not risk losing you by exposing you to fatigues and
dangers which befit neither your rank nor your sex.

I wish you never to receive T---- at Paris; he is a black sheep. You
would grieve me by doing otherwise.

Adieu, my dear. Love me, and be courageous.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 36.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Warsaw, January 26, 1807, Noon._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter. It pains me to see how you
are fretting yourself. The bridge of Mayence neither increases nor
decreases the distance which separates us. Remain, therefore, at
Paris. I should be vexed and uneasy to know that you were so miserable
and so isolated at Mayence. You must know that I ought, that I can,
consider only the success of my enterprise. If I could consult my
heart I should be with you, or you with me; for you would be most
unjust if you doubted my love and entire affection.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 37.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Willemberg, February 1, 1807, Noon._

Your letter of the 11th, from Mayence, has made me laugh.

To-day, I am a hundred miles from Warsaw; the weather is cold, but
fine.

Adieu, dear; be happy, show character.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 38.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

_My Dear_,--Your letter of January 20th has given me pain; it is too
sad. That's the fault of not being a little more devout! You tell me
that your glory consists in your happiness. That is narrow-minded; one
should say, my glory consists in the happiness of others. It is not
conjugal; one should say, my glory consists in the happiness of my
husband. It is not maternal; one should say, my glory consists in the
happiness of my children. Now, since nations--your husband, your
children--can only be happy with a certain amount of glory, you must
not make little of it. Fie, Josephine! your heart is excellent and
your arguments weak. You feel acutely, but you don't argue as well.

That's sufficient quarrelling. I want you to be cheerful, happy in
your lot, and that you should obey, not with grumbling and tears, but
with gaiety of heart and a little more good temper.

Adieu, dear; I start to-night to examine my outposts.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February 5th.--Combats of Bergfriede, Waltersdorf, and Deppen;
  Russians forced back._

  _February 6th.--Combat of Hof. Murat victorious._

  _February 8th.--Battle of Eylau; retreat of Russians._


No. 39.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Eylau, February 9, 1807_, 3 A.M.

_My Dear_,--Yesterday there was a great battle; the victory has
remained with me, but I have lost many men. The loss of the enemy,
which is still more considerable, does not console me. To conclude, I
write you these two lines myself, although I am very tired, to tell
you that I am well and that I love you.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 40.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Eylau, February 9, 1807_, 6 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I write you a line in order that you may not be uneasy.
The enemy has lost the battle, 40 pieces of cannon, 10 flags, 12,000
prisoners; he has suffered frightfully. I have lost many: 1600 killed,
3000 or 4000 wounded.

Your cousin Tascher conducts himself well; I have summoned him near me
with the title of orderly officer.

Corbineau has been killed by a shell; I was singularly attached to
that officer, who had much merit; I am very unhappy about him. My
mounted guard has covered itself with glory. Dahlman is dangerously
wounded.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 41.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Eylau, February 11, 1807_, 3 A.M.

_My Dear_,--I write you a line; you must have been very anxious. I
have beaten the enemy in a fight to be remembered, but it has cost
many brave lives. The bad weather that has set in forces me to take
cantonments.

Do not afflict yourself, please; all this will soon be over, and the
happiness of seeing you will make me promptly forget my fatigues.
Besides, I have never been in better health.

Young Tascher, of the 4th Regiment, has behaved well; he has had a
rough time of it. I have summoned him near me; I have made him an
orderly officer--there's an end to his troubles. This young man
interests me.

Adieu, dear; a thousand kisses.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 42.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Preussich-Eylau, February 12, 1807._

I send you a letter from General Darmagnac. He is a very good soldier,
who commanded the 32nd. He is much attached to me. If this Madame de
Richmond be well off, and it is a good match, I shall see this
marriage with pleasure. Make this known to both of them.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 43.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Eylau, February 14, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I am still at Eylau. This country is covered with dead and
wounded. It is not the bright side of warfare; one suffers, and the
mind is oppressed at the sight of so many victims. My health is good.
I have done as I wished, and driven back the enemy, while making his
projects fail.

You are sure to be uneasy, and that thought troubles me. Nevertheless,
calm yourself, my dear, and be cheerful.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

Tell Caroline and Pauline that the Grand Duke and the Prince[22] are
in excellent health.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February 16th.--Savary defeats Russians at Ostrolenka._


No. 44.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Eylau_, _February 17, 1807_, 3 A.M.

Your letter to hand, informing me of your arrival at Paris. I am very
glad to know you are there. My health is good.

The battle of Eylau was very sanguinary, and very hardly contested.
Corbineau was slain. He was a very brave man. I had grown very fond of
him.

Adieu, dear; it is as warm here as in the month of April; everything
is thawing. My health is good.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 45.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Landsberg_, _February 18, 1807_, 3 A.M.

I write you two lines. My health is good. I am moving to set my army
in winter quarters.

It rains and thaws as in the month of April. We have not yet had one
cold day.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 46.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Liebstadt_, _February 20, 1807_, 2 A.M.

I write you two lines, dear, in order that you may not be uneasy. My
health is very good, and my affairs prosper.

I have again put my army into cantonments.

The weather is extraordinary; it freezes and thaws; it is wet and
unsettled.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 47.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Liebstadt_, _February 21, 1807_, 2 A.M.

Your letter of the 4th February to hand; I see with pleasure that your
health is good. Paris will thoroughly re-establish it by giving you
cheerfulness and rest, and a return to your accustomed habits.

I am wonderfully well. The weather and the country are vile. My affairs
are fairly satisfactory. It thaws and freezes within twenty-four hours;
there can never have been known such an extraordinary winter.

Adieu, dear; I love you, I think of you, and wish to know that you are
contented, cheerful, and happy.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 48.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Liebstadt, February 21, 1807, Noon._

_My Dear_,--Your letter of the 8th received; I see with pleasure that
you have been to the opera, and that you propose holding receptions
weekly. Go occasionally to the theatre, and always into the Royal box.
I notice also with pleasure the banquets you are giving.

I am very well. The weather is still unsettled; it freezes and thaws.

I have once more put my army into cantonments in order to rest them.

Never be doleful, love me, and believe in my entire affection.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 49.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode_, _February 23, 1807_, 2 P.M.

_My Dear_,--Your letter of the 10th received. I am sorry to see you
are a little out of sorts.

I have been in the country for the past month, experiencing frightful
weather, because it has been unsettled, and varying from cold to warm
within a week. Still, I am very well.

Try and pass your time pleasantly; have no anxieties, and never doubt
the love I bear you.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February 26th.--Dupont defeats Russians at Braunsberg._


No. 50.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode, March 2, 1807._

_My Dear_,--It is two or three days since I wrote to you; I reproach
myself for it; I know your uneasiness. I am very well; my affairs
prosper. I am in a wretched village, where I shall pass a considerable
time; it is not as good as the great city! I again assure you, I was
never in such good health; you will find me very much stouter.

It is spring weather here; the snow has gone, the streams are
thawing--which is what I want.

I have ordered what you wish for Malmaison; be cheerful and happy; it
is my will.

Adieu, dear; I embrace you heartily.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _March 9th._--The Grand Sanhedrim, which assembled at Paris on
  February 9, terminates its sittings.


No. 51.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode_, _March 10, 1807_, 4 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter of the 25th. I see with
pleasure that you are well, and that you sometimes make a pilgrimage
to Malmaison.

My health is good, and my affairs prosper.

The weather has become rather cold again. I see that the winter has
been very variable everywhere.

Adieu, dear; keep well, be cheerful, and never doubt my affection,--Yours
ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 52.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode, March 11, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I received your letter of the 27th. I am sorry to see from
it that you are ill; take courage. My health is good; my affairs
prosper. I am waiting for fine weather, which should soon be here. I
love you and want to know that you are content and cheerful.

A great deal of nonsense will be talked of the battle of Eylau; the
bulletin tells everything; our losses are rather exaggerated in it
than minimised.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 53.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode_, _March 13, 1807_, 2 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I learn that the vexatious tittle-tattle that occurred in
your salon at Mayence has begun again; make people hold their tongues.
I shall be seriously annoyed with you if you do not find a remedy. You
allow yourself to be worried by the chatter of people who ought to
console you. I desire you to have a little character, and to know how
to put everybody into his (or her) proper place.

I am in excellent health. My affairs here are good. We are resting a
little, and organising our food supply.

Adieu, dear; keep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 54.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode, March 15, 1807._

I received your letter of the 1st of March, from which I see that you
were much upset by the catastrophe of Minerva at the opera. I am very
glad to see that you go out and seek distractions.

My health is very good. My affairs go excellently. Take no heed of all
the unfavourable rumours that may be circulated. Never doubt my
affection, and be without the least uneasiness.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 55.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  Osterode, March 17, 1807.

_My Dear_,--It is not necessary for you to go to the small plays and
into a private box; it ill befits your rank; you should only go to the
four great theatres, and always into the Royal box. Live as you would
do if I were at Paris.

My health is very good. The cold weather has recommenced. The
thermometer has been down to 8°.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 56.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode_, _March 17, 1807_, 10 P.M.

I have received yours of March 5th, from which I see with pleasure
that you are well. My health is perfect. Yet the weather of the past
two days has been cold again; the thermometer to-night has been at
10°, but the sun has given us a very fine day.

Adieu, dear. Very kindest regards to everybody.

Tell me something about the death of that poor Dupuis; have his
brother told that I wish to help him.

My affairs here go excellently.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 57.

  _March 25th.--Abolition of slave trade in Great Britain by
  Parliament._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _March 25, 1807._

I have received your letter of March 13th. If you really wish to
please me, you must live exactly as you live when I am at Paris. Then
you were not in the habit of visiting the second-rate theatres or
other places. You ought always to go into the Royal box. As for your
home life: hold receptions there, and have your fixed circles of
friends; that, my dear, is the only way to deserve my approbation.
Greatness has its inconveniences; an Empress cannot go where a private
individual may.

Very best love. My health is good. My affairs prosper.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 58.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode_, _March 27, 1807_, 7 P.M.

_My Dear_,--Your letter pains me. There is no question of your dying.
You are in good health, and you can have no just ground for grief.

I think you should go during May to St. Cloud; but you must spend the
whole month of April at Paris.

My health is good. My affairs prosper.

You must not think of travelling this summer; nothing of that sort is
feasible. You ought not to frequent inns and camps. I long as much as
you for our meeting and for a quiet life.

I can do other things besides fight; but duty stands first and
foremost. All my life long I have sacrificed everything to my
destiny--peace of mind, personal advantage, happiness.

Adieu, dear. See as little as possible of that Madame de P----. She
is a woman who belongs to the lowest grade of society; she is
thoroughly common and vulgar.

  NAPOLEON.

I have had occasion to find fault with M. de T----. I have sent him to
his country house in Burgundy. I wish no longer to hear his name
mentioned.


No. 59.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Osterode, April 1, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I have just got your letter of the 20th. I am sorry to see
you are ill. I wrote you to stay at Paris the whole month of April,
and to go to St. Cloud on May 1st. You may go and spend the Sundays,
and a day or two, at Malmaison. At St. Cloud you may have your usual
visitors.

My health is good. It is still quite cold enough here. All is quiet.

I have named the little princess Josephine.[23] Eugène should be well
pleased.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 60.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein, April 2, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I write you a line. I have just moved my headquarters into
a very fine château, after the style of Bessières', where I have
several fireplaces, which is a great comfort to me; getting up often
in the night, I like to see the fire.

My health is perfect. The weather is fine, but still cold. The
thermometer is at four to five degrees.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 61.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein_, _April 6, 1807_, 3 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter, from which I see you have
spent Holy Week at Malmaison, and that your health is better. I long
to hear that you are thoroughly well.

I am in a fine château, where there are fireplaces, which I find a
great comfort. It is still very cold here; everything is frozen.

You will have seen that I have good news from Constantinople.

My health is good. There is nothing fresh here.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 62.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein_, _April 10, 1807_, 6 P.M.

_My Dear_,--My health is excellent. Here spring is beginning; but as
yet there is no vegetation. I wish you to be cheerful and contented,
and never to doubt my attachment. Here all goes well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 63.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein_, _April 14, 1807_, 7 P.M.

I have received your letter of April 3rd. I see from it that you are
well, and that it has been very cold in Paris. The weather here is
very unsettled; still I think the spring has come at length; already
the ice has almost gone. I am in splendid health.

Adieu, dear. I ordered some time ago for Malmaison all that you ask
for,--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 64.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein, April 18, 1807._

I have received your letter of April 5th. I am sorry to see from it
that you are grieved at what I have told you. As usual, your little
Creole head becomes flurried and excited in a moment. Let us not,
therefore, speak of it again. I am very well, but yet the weather is
rainy. Savary is very ill of a bilious fever, before Dantzic; I hope
it will be nothing serious.

Adieu, dear; my very best wishes to you.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 65.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein_, _April 24, 1807_, 7 P.M.

I have received your letter of the 12th. I see from it that your
health is good, and that you are very happy at the thought of going to
Malmaison.

The weather has changed to fine; I hope it may continue so.

There is nothing fresh here. I am very well.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 66.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein_, _May 2, 1807_, 4 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I have just received your letter of the 23rd; I see with
pleasure that you are well, and that you are as fond as ever of
Malmaison. I hear the Arch-Chancellor is in love. Is this a joke, or a
fact? It has amused me; you might have given me a hint about it!

I am very well, and the fine season commences. Spring shows itself at
length, and the leaves begin to shoot.

Adieu, dear; very best wishes.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 67.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein, May 10, 1807._

I have just received your letter. I know not what you tell me about
ladies in correspondence with me. I love only my little Josephine,
sweet, pouting, and capricious, who can quarrel with grace, as she
does everything else, for she is always lovable, except when she is
jealous; then she becomes a regular shrew.[24] But let us come back to
these ladies. If I had leisure for any among them, I assure you that I
should like them to be pretty rosebuds.

Are those of whom you speak of this kind?

I wish you to have only those persons to dinner who have dined with
me; that your list be the same for your assemblies; that you never
make intimates at Malmaison of ambassadors and foreigners. If you
should do the contrary, you would displease me. Finally, do not allow
yourself to be duped too much by persons whom I do not know, and who
would not come to the house, if I were there.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 68.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Finckenstein, May 12, 1807._

I have just received your letter of May 2nd, in which I see that you
are getting ready to go to St. Cloud. I was sorry to see the bad
conduct of Madame ----. Might you not speak to her about mending her
ways, which at present might easily cause unpleasantness on the part
of her husband?

From what I hear, Napoleon is cured; I can well imagine how unhappy
his mother has been; but measles is an ailment to which every one is
liable. I hope that he has been vaccinated, and that he will at least
be safe from the smallpox.

Adieu, dear. The weather is very warm, and vegetation has begun; but
it will be some days before there is any grass.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 69.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Finckenstein, May 14, 1807._

I realise the grief which the death of this poor Napoleon[25] must
cause you; you can imagine what I am enduring. I should like to be by
your side, in order that your sorrow might be kept within reasonable
bounds. You have had the good fortune never to lose children; but it
is one of the pains and conditions attached to our miseries here
below. I trust I may hear you have been rational in your sorrow, and
that your health remains good! Would you willingly augment my grief?

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 70.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Finckenstein, May 16, 1807._

I have just received your letter of May 6th. I see from it how ill you
are already; and I fear that you are not rational, and that you are
making yourself too wretched about the misfortune which has come upon
us.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 71.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT LACKEN.

  _Finckenstein, May 20, 1807._

I have just received your letter of May 10th. I see that you have gone
to Lacken. I think you might stay there a fortnight; it would please
the Belgians and serve to distract you.

I am sorry to see that you have not been rational. Grief has bounds
which should not be passed. Take care of yourself for the sake of your
friend, and believe in my entire affection.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 72.

  _May 24th.--Dantzic surrenders to Lefebvre after two months'
  siege, with 800 guns and immense stores._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT LACKEN.

  _Finckenstein, May 24, 1807._

Your letter from Lacken just received. I am sorry to see your grief
undiminished, and that Hortense has not yet come; she is unreasonable,
and does not deserve our love, since she only loves her children.

Try to calm her, and do not make me wretched. For every ill without a
remedy consolations must be found.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 73.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT LACKEN.

  _Finckenstein, May 26, 1807._

I have just received your letter of the 16th. I have seen with
pleasure that Hortense has arrived at Lacken. I am annoyed at what you
tell me of the state of stupor in which she still is. She must have
more courage, and force herself to have it. I cannot imagine why they
want her to go to take the waters; she will forget her trouble much
better at Paris, and find more sources of consolation.

Show force of character, be cheerful, and keep well. My health is
excellent.

Adieu, dear. I suffer much from all your griefs; it is a great trouble
to me not to be by your side.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _May 28th.--Lefebvre made Duke of Dantzic by Napoleon._

  _May 29th._--Selim III. deposed in Turkey by Mustapha IV., his
  nephew.

  _June 1st.--22,000 Spanish troops, sent by Charles IV., join the
  French army in Germany._


No. 74.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Dantzig, June 2, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I note your arrival at Malmaison. I have no letters from
you; I am vexed with Hortense, she has never written me a line. All
that you tell me about her grieves me. Why have you not found her some
distractions? Weeping won't do it! I trust you will take care of
yourself in order that I may not find you utterly woebegone.

I have been the two past days at Dantzic; the weather is very fine, my
health excellent. I think more of you than you are thinking of a
husband far away.

Adieu, dear; very kindest regards. Pass on this letter to Hortense.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 75.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Marienburg, June 3, 1807._

This morning I slept at Marienburg. Yesterday I left Dantzic; my
health is very good. Every letter that comes from St. Cloud tells me
you are always weeping. That is not well; it is necessary for you to
keep well and be cheerful.

Hortense is still unwell; what you tell me of her makes me very sorry
for her.

Adieu, dear; think of all the affection I bear for you.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 5th.--Russians defeated at Spanden; Bernadotte wounded._


No. 76.

  _June 6th.--Russians defeated at Deppen by Soult._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Finckenstein, June 6, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I am in flourishing health. Your yesterday's letter pained
me; it seems to me that you are always grieving, and that you are not
reasonable. The weather is very fine.

Adieu, dear; I love you and wish to see you cheerful and contented.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 9th.--Russians defeated at Guttstadt by Napoleon, and_

  _June 10th.--At Heilsberg._

  _June 14th.--Battle of Friedland, completing the "Campaign of Ten
  Days."_


No. 77.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Friedland, June 15, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I write you only a line, for I am very tired, by reason of
several days' bivouacking. My children have worthily celebrated the
anniversary of the battle of Marengo.

The battle of Friedland will be as celebrated for my people, and
equally glorious. The entire Russian army routed, 80 pieces of cannon
captured, 30,000 men taken or slain, 25 Russian generals killed,
wounded, or taken, the Russian Guard wiped out. The battle is worthy
of her sisters--Marengo, Austerlitz, Jena. The bulletin will tell you
the rest. My loss is not considerable. I out-manoeuvred the enemy
successfully.

Be content and without uneasiness.

Adieu, dear; my horse is waiting.

  NAPOLEON.

You may give this news as official, if it arrives before the bulletin.
They may also fire salvoes. Cambacères will make the proclamation.


No. 78.

  _June 16th.--Königsberg captured by Soult--"what was left to the
  King of Prussia is conquered."_

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Friedland_, _June 16, 1807_, 4 P.M.

_My Dear_,--Yesterday I despatched Moustache with the news of the
battle of Friedland. Since then I have continued to pursue the enemy.
Königsberg, which is a town of 80,000 souls, is in my power. I have
found there many cannon, large stores, and, lastly, more than 160,000
muskets, which have come from England.

Adieu, dear. My health is perfect, although I have a slight
catarrh caused by bivouacking in the rain and cold. Be happy and
cheerful.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 17th.--Neisse, in Silesia, with 6000 men, surrenders to the
  French; also_

  _June 18th--Glatz._


No. 79.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, June 19, 1807._

This morning I despatched Tascher to you, to calm all your fears. Here
all goes splendidly. The battle of Friedland has decided everything.
The enemy is confounded, overwhelmed, and greatly weakened.

My health is good, and my army is superb.

Adieu, dear. Be cheerful and contented.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 21st.--Armistice concluded at Tilsit._


No. 80.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, June 22, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I have your letter of June 10th. I am sorry to see you are
so depressed. You will see by the bulletin that I have concluded a
suspension of arms, and that we are negotiating peace. Be contented
and cheerful.

I despatched Borghèse to you, and, twelve hours later, Moustache;
therefore you should have received in good time my letters and the
news of the grand battle of Friedland.

I am wonderfully well, and wish to hear that you are happy.--Yours
ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 81.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, June 25, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I have just seen the Emperor Alexander. I was much pleased
with him. He is a very handsome, young, and kind-hearted Emperor; he
has more intelligence than people usually give him credit for.
To-morrow he will lodge in the town of Tilsit.

Adieu, dear. I am very anxious to hear that you are well and happy. My
health is very good.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 82.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, July 3, 1807._

_My Dear_,--M. de Turenne will give you full details of all that
has occurred here. Everything goes excellently. I think I told you
that the Emperor of Russia drinks your health with much cordiality.
He, as well as the King of Prussia, dines with me every day. I
sincerely trust that you are happy. Adieu, dear. A thousand loving
remembrances.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 83.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, July 6, 1807._

I have your letter of June 25th. I was grieved to see that you were
selfish, and that the success of my arms should have no charm for
you.

The beautiful Queen of Prussia is to come to-morrow to dine with me.

I am well, and am longing to see you again, when destiny shall so
order it. Still, it may be sooner than we expect.

Adieu, dear; a thousand loving remembrances.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 84.

_July 7th.--Peace signed between France and Russia._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, July 7, 1807._

_My Dear_,--Yesterday the Queen of Prussia dined with me. I had to be
on the defence against some further concessions she wished me to make
to her husband; but I was very polite, and yet held firmly to my
policy. She is very charming. I shall soon give you the details, which
I could not possibly give you now unless at great length. When you
read this letter, peace with Prussia and Russia will be concluded, and
Jerome acknowledged King of Westphalia, with a population of three
millions. This news is for yourself alone.

Adieu, dear; I love you, and wish to know that you are cheerful and
contented.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 85.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Tilsit, July 8,[26] 1807._

The Queen of Prussia is really charming; she is full of _coquetterie_
for me; but don't be jealous; I am an oil-cloth over which all that
can only glide. It would cost me too much to play the lover.

  NAPOLEON.

No. 12,875 of the _Correspondence_ (taken from Las Cases).

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 9th.--Peace signed between France and Prussia, the latter
  resigning all its possessions between the Rhine and the Elbe._


No. 86.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Dresden, July 18, 1807, Noon._

_My Dear_,--Yesterday I arrived at Dresden at 5 P.M., in excellent
health, although I remained a hundred hours in the carriage without
getting out. I am staying here with the King of Saxony, with whom I am
highly pleased. I have now therefore traversed more than half the
distance that separates us.

It is very likely that one of these fine nights I may descend upon St.
Cloud like a jealous husband, so beware.

Adieu, dear; I shall have great pleasure in seeing you.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 25th._--Plot of Prince Ferdinand of Asturias against his
  parents, the King and Queen of Spain.

  _July 27th.--Napoleon arrives at St. Cloud,_ 5 A.M.

  _August 19th.--Napoleon suppresses the French Tribunate._

  _August 20th.--Marshal Brune captures Stralsund from the Swedes._

  _September 1st.--The Ionian Isles become part of the French
  Empire._

  _September 5th to 7th._--Bombardment of Copenhagen by the
  English.

  _September 7th.--Occupation of Rugen by Marshal Brune._

  _October 6th._--War between Russia and Sweden.

  _October 16th.--Treaty of alliance between France and Denmark._

  _October 17th.--Junot with 27,000 men starts for Portugal, with
  whom France has been nominally at war since 1801._

  _October 27th.--Treaty of Fontainebleau signed between France and
  Spain. (Plot of Prince Ferdinand against his father discovered at
  Madrid the same day.)_

  _November 8th._--Russia declares war against England.

  _November 15th.--Napoleon constitutes the kingdom of Westphalia,
  with his brother Jerome as king._

  _November 26th.--Junot enters Abrantès, and on_

  _November 30th, enters Lisbon._

  _December 9th._--Trade suspended between England and the United
  States (_re_ rights of neutrals).

  _December 23rd.--France levies a contribution of 100 million
  francs on Portugal._


FOOTNOTES

  [22] Murat and Borghèse.

  [23] Eugène's eldest daughter, the Princess Josephine Maximilienne
       Auguste, born March 14, 1807; married Bernadotte's son, Prince
       Oscar, June 18, 1827.

  [24] _Toute diablesse._

  [25] Charles Napoleon, Prince Royal of Holland, died at the Hague, May
       5, 1807.

  [26] Presumed date.




SERIES H


"Napoleon was received with unbounded adulation by all the towns of
Italy.... He was the Redeemer of France, but the Creator of
Italy."--ALISON, _Hist. of Europe_ (vol. xi. 280).




SERIES H

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 264-267.)


  LETTER                                PAGE

  No. 1. _Milan_                         264
         _Mont Cenis_                    264
         _Eugène_                        264

  No. 2. _Venice_                        265
         _November 30th_                 265

  No. 3. _Udine_                       265-7
         _I may soon be in Paris_        267




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO
THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE DURING THE
JOURNEY HE MADE IN ITALY, 1807.


  _November 16th.--Napoleon leaves Fontainebleau._

  _November 22nd-25th.--At Milan._


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Milan, November 25, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I have been here two days. I am very glad that I did not
bring you here; you would have suffered dreadfully in crossing Mont
Cenis, where a storm detained me twenty-four hours.

I found Eugène in good health; I am very pleased with him. The Princess
is ill; I went to see her at Monza. She has had a miscarriage; she is
getting better.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _November 29th to December 7th.--At Venice (writes Talleyrand,
  "This land is a phenomenon of the power of commerce")._


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Venice, November 30, 1807._

I have your letter of November 22nd. The last two days I have been at
Venice. The weather is very bad, which has not prevented me from
sailing over the lagoons in order to see the different forts.

I am glad to see you are enjoying yourself at Paris.

The King of Bavaria, with his family, as well as the Princess Eliza,
are here.

I am spending December 2nd[27] here, and that past I shall be on my
way home, and very glad to see you.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Udine, December 11, 1807._

_My Dear_,--I have your letter of December 3rd, from which I note that
you were much pleased with the Jardin des Plantes. Here I am at the
extreme limit of my journey; it is possible I may soon be in Paris,
where I shall be very glad to see you again. The weather has not as
yet been cold here, but very rainy. I have profited by this good
season up to the last moment, for I suppose that at Christmas the
winter will at length make itself felt.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _December 12th.--At Udine._

  _December 14th.--At Mantua._

  _December 16th.--At Milan (till December 26th)._

  _December 17th.--His Milan decree against English commerce._

  _December 27th-28th.--At Turin._


1808.

  _January 1st.--At Paris._


FOOTNOTES

  [27] His Coronation Day.




SERIES I


"The imbecility of Charles IV., the vileness of Ferdinand, and the
corruption of Godoy were undoubtedly the proximate causes of the
calamities which overwhelmed Spain."--NAPIER'S _Peninsular War_ (vol.
i. preface).




SERIES I

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 267-269.)


  LETTER                                          PAGE

  No. 1. _Bayonne_                                 267

  No. 2. _A country-house_                         267
         _Everything is still most primitive_      267

  No. 3. _Prince of the Asturias_                  268
         _The Queen_                               268

  No. 4. _A son has been born_                     268
         _Arrive on the 27th_                      269




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO
THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE DURING THE
STAY THAT HE MADE AT BAYONNE,
1808.


  "This year offers a strange picture. The Emperor Napoleon was at
  Venice in the month of January, surrounded by the homage of all
  the courts and princes of Italy; in the month of April he was at
  Bayonne, surrounded by that of Spain, and the great personages of
  that country; and, finally, in the month of October he is at
  Erfurth, with his _parterre_ of kings."--_Mémoires du Duc de
  Rovigo._

       *       *       *       *       *

  _January 27th.--Queen and Prince Regent of Portugal reach Rio de
  Janeiro._

  _February 2nd.--French troops enter Rome._

  _February 17th.--French occupy Pampeluna, and_

  _February 29th.--Barcelona._

  _March 19th.--Charles IV. abdicates, and his son proclaimed
  Ferdinand VII._

  _March 20th.--Godoy imprisoned by Ferdinand._

  _March 23rd.--Murat enters Madrid._

  _March 27th.--Napoleon excommunicated._

  _April 15th.--Napoleon arrives at Bayonne._


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT BORDEAUX.

  _Bayonne, April 16, 1808._

I have arrived here in good health, rather tired by a dull journey and
a very bad road.

I am very glad you stayed behind, for the houses here are wretched and
very small.

I go to-day into a small house in the country, about a mile from the
town.

Adieu, dear. Take care of yourself.


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT BORDEAUX.

  _Bayonne, April 17, 1808._

I have just received yours of April 15th. What you tell me of the
owner of the country-house pleases me. Go and spend the day there
sometimes.

I am sending an order for you to have 20,000 francs per month
additional while I am away, counting from the 1st of April.

I am lodged atrociously. I am leaving this place in an hour, to occupy
a country-house (_bastide_) about a mile away. The Infant Don Carlos
and five or six Spanish grandees are here, the Prince of the Asturias
fifty miles away. King Charles and the Queen are due. I know not how I
shall lodge all these people. Everything here is still most primitive
(_à l'auberge_). The health of my troops in Spain is good.

It took me some time to understand your little jokes; I have laughed
at your recollections. O you women, what memories you have!

My health is fairly good, and I love you most affectionately. I wish
you to give my kind regards to everybody at Bordeaux; I have been too
busy to send them to anybody.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _April 20th.--Ferdinand arrives at Bayonne._


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT BORDEAUX.

  _April 21, 1808._

I have just received your letter of April 19th. Yesterday I had the
Prince of the Asturias and his suite to dinner, which occasioned me
considerable embarrassment. I am waiting for Charles IV. and the
Queen.

My health is good. I am now sufficiently recovered for the campaign.

Adieu, dear. Your letters always give me much pleasure.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 4.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT BORDEAUX.

  _Bayonne, April 23, 1808._

_My Dear_,--A son has been born to Hortense;[28] I am highly
delighted. I am not surprised that you tell me nothing of it, since
your letter is dated the 21st, and the child was only born on the
20th,[29] during the night.

You can start on the 26th, sleep at Mont de Marsan, and arrive here on
the 27th. Have your best dinner-service sent on here on the 25th, in
the evening. I have made arrangements for you to have a little house
in the country, next to the one I have. My health is good.

I am waiting for Charles IV. and his wife.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _April 30th.--Charles IV. and the Queen arrive at Bayonne._

  _May 1st.--Ferdinand gives back the crown to his father._

  _May 2nd.--Murat subdues insurrection at Madrid._

  _May 5th.--Treaty of Bayonne; Charles IV. and Ferdinand (May 6)
  surrender to Napoleon their rights to the Spanish crown._

  _May 13th.--Spanish Junta ask for Joseph Bonaparte to be their
  king._

  _June 6th.--King Joseph proclaimed King of Spain and the Indies by
  Napoleon, in an imperial decree, dated Bayonne._

  _June 7th.--French, under Dupont, sacked Cordova._

  _June 9th.--Emperor of Austria calls out his militia._

  _June 15th.--French fleet at Cadiz surrender to the Spanish._

  _July 4th.--English cease hostilities with Spain, and recognise
  Ferdinand VII._

  _July 7th.--Spanish new constitution sworn to by Joseph and by the
  Junta._

  _July 9th.--Commences the siege of Saragossa._

  _July 14th.--Bessières defeats 40,000 Spaniards at Medina de Rio
  Seco._

  _July 15th.--Murat declared King of Naples._

  _July 20th.--Joseph enters Madrid._ Mahmoud deposed by his younger
  brother at Constantinople.

  _July 22nd.--Dupont capitulates at Baylen--"the only stain on
  French arms for twenty years (1792-1812)."_--Montgaillard.

  _July 30th.--French protest against Austrian armaments._

  _August 1st.--Wellington landed in Portugal._

  _August 21st.--Battle of Vimiera, creditable to Junot._

  _August 25th.--Spanish troops reoccupy Madrid._

  _August 30th.--Convention of Cintra. French only hold Barcelona,
  Biscay, Navarre, and Alava, in the whole of Spain._

  _September 8th.--Convention of Paris (Prussia and France);
  Prussian army not to exceed 40,000 men._


FOOTNOTES

  [28] Charles Louis Napoleon, afterwards Napoleon III.

  [29] At 17 Rue Lafitte.




SERIES J


  "When he shows as seeking quarter, with paws like hands in prayer,
  _That_ is the time of peril--the time of the truce of the Bear!"

  --KIPLING.




SERIES J

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 269-273.)


  LETTER                                             PAGE

  No. 1. _I have rather a cold_                       270
         _I am pleased with the Emperor_              270

  No. 2. _Shooting over the battlefield of Jena_      271
         _The Weimar ball_                            271
         _A few trifling ailments_                    271

  No. 3. _I am pleased with Alexander_                272
         _He ought to be with me_                     272
         _Erfurt_                                     273




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO
THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE DURING HIS
STAY AT ERFURT, 1808.


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _Erfurt, September 29, 1808._

I have rather a cold. I have received your letter, dated Malmaison. I
am well pleased with the Emperor and every one here.

It is an hour after midnight, and I am tired.

Adieu, dear; take care of yourself.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

  _October 9, 1808._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter. I note with pleasure that you
are well. I have just been shooting over the battlefield of Jena. We
had breakfast (_déjeuné_) at the spot where I bivouacked on the night
of the battle.

I assisted at the Weimar ball. The Emperor Alexander dances; but not
I. Forty years are forty years.

My health is really sound, in spite of a few trifling ailments.

Adieu, dear; I hope to see you soon.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT ST. CLOUD.

_My Dear_,--I write you seldom; I am very busy. Conversations which
last whole days, and which do not improve my cold. Still all goes
well. I am pleased with Alexander; he ought to be with me. If he were
a woman, I think I should make him my sweetheart.

I shall be back to you shortly; keep well and let me find you plump
and rosy.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.




SERIES K


"The winter campaign commenced on the 1st of November 1808, and
terminated on the 1st of March 1809, to the advantage of the
French, who, for that reason, denominate it the _Imperial Campaign_.
The Spaniards were long before they could recover from the terror
caused by the defeat of their armies, the capture of Madrid, the
surrender of Saragossa, and the departure of the English from
Corunna."--_Sarrazin's History of the War in Spain and Portugal_,
1815.




SERIES K

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 273-278.)


  LETTER                                                           PAGE

  No. 5. Aranda                                                     273

  No. 6. Madrid                                                     273
          _Parisian weather_                                        273

  No. 8. _Kourakin_                                                 274

  No. 9. _The English_ appear to have received reinforcements       274

  No. 10. _Benavente_                                               274
          _The English flee panic-stricken_                         274
          _The weather_                                             274
          _Lefebvre_                                                275

  No. 11. _Your letters_                                          275-6

  No. 12. _The English are in utter rout_                           276

  Nos. 13 & 14. Valladolid                                          277
          _Eugène has a daughter_                                   277
          _They are foolish in Paris_                               277




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO
THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE DURING THE
SPANISH CAMPAIGN, 1808 AND 1809.


  _October 29th.--English enter Spain._

  _October 31st.--Blake defeated by Lefebvre at Tornosa._


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _November 3, 1808._

I arrived to-night[30] with considerable trouble. I had ridden several
stages at full speed. Still, I am well.

To-morrow I start for Spain.

My troops are arriving in force.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _November 4th.--Napoleon enters Spain._


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Tolosa, November 5, 1808._

I am at Tolosa. I am starting for Vittoria, where I shall be in a few
hours. I am fairly well, and I hope everything will soon be
completed.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Vittoria, November 7._

_My Dear_,--I have been the last two days at Vittoria. I am in good
health. My troops are arriving daily; the Guard arrived to-day.

The King is in very good health. I am very busy.

I know that you are in Paris. Never doubt my affection.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _November 10th._--Battle of Burgos. _Soult and Bessières defeat
  Spaniards, who lose 3000 killed and 3000 prisoners, and 20
  cannon._

  _November 12th._--Battle of Espinosa. _Marshal Victor defeats La
  Romana and Blake, who lose 20,000 men and 50 cannon._


No. 4.

  _November 14th._--Third revolution at Constantinople. _Mahmoud IV.
  assassinated (November 15th)._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Burgos, November 14, 1808._

Matters here are progressing at a great rate. The weather is very
fine. We are successful. My health is very good.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _November 23rd.--Battle of Tudela. Castaños and Palafox
  defeated, with loss of 7000 men and 30 cannon, by Marshal
  Lannes. "The battle of Tudela makes the pendant of that of
  Espinosa."_--NAPOLEON.


No. 5.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _November 26, 1808._

I have received your letter. I trust that your health be as good as
mine is, although I am very busy. All goes well here.

I think you should return to the Tuileries on December 21st, and from
that date give a concert daily for eight days.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

Kind regards to Hortense and to M. Napoleon.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _December 3rd.--French voluntarily evacuate Berlin._

  _December 4th.--Surrender of Madrid. Napoleon abolishes the
  Inquisition and feudal rights._ ("_He regards the taking of a
  capital as decisive for the submission of a whole kingdom; thus in
  1814 will act his adversaries, pale but judicious imitators of his
  strategy._"--Montgaillard.)


No. 6.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _December 7, 1808._

Your letter of the 28th to hand. I am glad to see that you are well.
You will have seen that young Tascher has distinguished himself, which
has pleased me. My health is good.

Here we are enjoying Parisian weather of the last fortnight in May. We
are hot, and have no fires; but the nights are rather cool.

Madrid is quiet. All my affairs prosper.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

Kind regards to Hortense and to M. Napoleon.


No. 7.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Chamartin, December 10, 1808._

_My Dear_,--Yours to hand, in which you tell me what bad weather you
are having in Paris; here it is the best weather imaginable. Please
tell me what mean these alterations Hortense is making; I hear she is
sending away her servants. Is it because they have refused to do what
was required? Give me some particulars. Reforms are not desirable.

Adieu, dear. The weather here is delightful. All goes excellently, and
I pray you to keep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 8.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _December 21, 1808._

You ought to have been at the Tuileries on the 12th. I trust you may
have been pleased with your rooms.

I have authorised the presentation of Kourakin to you and the family;
be kind to him, and let him take part in your plays.

Adieu, dear. I am well. The weather is rainy; it is rather cold.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 9.

  _December 22nd.--Napoleon quits Madrid._

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Madrid, December 22, 1808._

I start at once to outmanoeuvre the English, who appear to have
received reinforcements and wish to look big.

The weather is fine, my health perfect; don't be uneasy.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 10.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Benavento, December 31, 1808._

_My Dear_,--The last few days I have been in pursuit of the English,
but they flee panic-stricken. They have pusillanimously abandoned the
remnant of La Romana's army in order not to delay its retreat a single
half day. More than a hundred waggons of their baggage have already
been taken. The weather is very bad.

Lefebvre[31] has been captured. He took part in a skirmish with 300 of
his chasseurs; these idiots crossed a river by swimming and threw
themselves in the midst of the English cavalry; they killed several,
but on their return Lefebvre had his horse wounded; it was swimming,
the current took him to the bank where the English were; he was taken.
Console his wife.

Adieu, dear. Bessières, with 10,000 cavalry, is at Astorga.

  NAPOLEON.

A happy New Year to everybody.


No. 11.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _January 3, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letters of the 18th and 21st. I am
close behind the English.

The weather is cold and rigorous, but all goes well.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

A happy New Year, and a very happy one, to my Josephine.


No. 12.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Benavento, January 5, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I write you a line. The English are in utter rout; I have
instructed the Duke of Dalmatia to pursue them closely (_l'épee dans
les reins_). I am well; the weather bad.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 13.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _January 8, 1809._

I have received yours of the 23rd and 26th. I am sorry to see you have
toothache. I have been here two days. The weather is what we must
expect at this season. The English are embarking. I am in good
health.

Adieu, dear.

I am writing Hortense. Eugène has a daughter.

Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 14.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _January 9, 1809._

Moustache brings me your letter of 31st December. I see from it, dear,
that you are sad and have very gloomy disquietudes. Austria will not
make war on me; if she does, I have 150,000 men in Germany and as many
on the Rhine, and 400,000 Germans to reply to her. Russia will not
separate herself from me. They are foolish in Paris; all goes well.

I shall be at Paris the moment I think it worth while. I advise you to
beware of ghosts; one fine day, at two o'clock in the morning.

But adieu, dear; I am well, and am yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


FOOTNOTES

  [30] At Bayonne.

  [31] General Lefebvre--Desnouettes.




SERIES L


"Berthier, incapable of acting a principal part, was surprised, and
making a succession of false movements that would have been fatal to
the French army, if the Emperor, journeying night and day, had not
arrived at the very hour when his lieutenant was on the point of
consummating the ruin of the army. But then was seen the supernatural
force of Napoleon's genius. In a few hours he changed the aspect of
affairs, and in a few days, maugre their immense number, his enemies,
baffled and flying in all directions, proclaimed his mastery in an art
which, up to that moment, was imperfect; for never, since troops first
trod a field of battle, was such a display of military genius made by
man."--NAPIER.




SERIES L

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 278-295.)


  LETTER                                                            PAGE

          Napoleon's position in Europe                              278

  No. 1. _Donauwerth_                                                281
          The Ratisbon proclamation, and first successes of
            the campaign up to April 23rd                          281-2

  No. 2. _May 6th_                                                   282
          _The ball that touched me_                                 283

  No. 3. Baron Marbot's foray; and memories of Richard
            Coeur de Lion                                            284

  No. 4. _Schoenbrunn_                                             284-5
          _May 12th_                                                 285

  No. 5. _Ebersdorf_                                                 286
          _Eugène... has completely performed the task_              287

  No. 6. _May 29th_                                                  288

  No. 7. _I have ordered the two princes_                          288-9
          _The Duke of Montebello_                                   289
          _Thus everything ends_                                     289

  No. 9. _Eugène won a battle_                                       290

  No. 11. _Wagram_                                                   290
          _Lasalle_                                                  291
          _I am sunburnt_                                            291

  No. 12. _A surfeit of bile_                                        291
          _Wolkersdorf_                                              291

  No. 16. _My affairs follow my wishes_                              292

  No. 17. _August 21st_                                              292

  No. 18. _Comedians_                                                292
          _Women ... not having been presented_                      293

  No. 19. _All this is very suspicious_                              293

  No. 20. _Krems_                                                    293
          _My health has never been better_                          293

  No. 23. _October 14th_                                             294

  No. 24. _Stuttgard_                                                295




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE DURING THE
AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN, 1809.


EVENTS OF 1809.

  _January 7th._--King and Queen of Prussia visit Alexander at St.
  Petersburg.

  _January 12th._--Cayenne and French Guiana captured by Spanish and
  Portuguese South Americans.

  _January 13th._--Combat of Alcazar. Victor defeats Spaniards.

  _January 14th._--Treaty of Alliance between England and Spain.

  _January 16th._--Battle of Corunna. Moore killed; Baird wounded.

  _January 17th._--English army sails for England.

  _January 22nd._--King Joseph returns to Madrid.

  _January 27th._--Soult takes Ferrol (retaken by English, June
  22nd).

  _February 21st._--Lannes takes Saragossa.

  _February 23rd._--English capture Martinique.

  _March 4th._--Madison made President of United States.

  _March 29th._--Soult fights battle of Oporto. Spaniards lose
  20,000 men and 200 guns. Gustavus Adolphus abdicates throne of
  Sweden.

  _April 9th._--Austrians under Archduke Charles cross the Inn,
  enter Bavaria, and take Munich. _Napoleon receives this news April
  12th, and reaches Strasburg April 15th._

  _April 15th._--Eugène defeated on the Tagliamento.

  _April 16th._--And at Sacile.

  _April 19th._--Combat of Pfafferhofen. Oudinot repulses Austrians,
  while Davoust wins the Battle of Thann. _Napoleon joins the
  army._

  _April 20th._--Battle of Abensberg. Archduke Louis defeated.
  Austrians take Ratisbon, and 1800 prisoners. Poles defeated by
  Archduke Ferdinand at Baszy.

  _April 21st._--Combat of Landshut; heavy Austrian losses.
  Austrians under Archduke Ferdinand take Warsaw.

  _April 22nd.--Battle of Eckmühl. Napoleon defeats Archduke
  Charles._

  _April 23rd._--French take Ratisbon.

  _April 25th._--King of Bavaria re-enters Munich.

  _April 26th._--French army crosses the Inn.

  _April 28th-30th._--French force the Salza, and cut in two the
  main Austrian army--"One of the most beautiful manoeuvres of
  modern tactics" (_Montgaillard_).

  _April 29th._--Combat of Caldiero. Eugène defeats Archduke John.

  _May 3rd._--Russia declares war on Austria, and enters Galicia.

  _May 4th._--Combat of Ebersberg. Massena defeats Austrians, but
  loses a large number of men.


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Donauwoerth, April 17, 1809._

I arrived here yesterday at 4 A.M.; I am just leaving it. Everything
is under way. Military operations are in full activity. Up to the
present, there is nothing new.

My health is good.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Enns, May 6, 1809, Noon._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter. The ball that touched me has
not wounded me; it barely grazed the tendon Achilles.

My health is very good. You are wrong to be uneasy.

My affairs here go excellently.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

Kind regards to Hortense and the Duke de Berg.[32]

       *       *       *       *       *

  _May 8th._--Eugène crosses the Piave, and defeats Archduke John.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Saint-Polten, May 9, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I write you from Saint-Polten. To-morrow I shall be before
Vienna; it will be exactly a month to the day after the Austrians
crossed the Inn, and violated peace.

My health is good, the weather splendid, and the soldiery very
cheerful; there is wine here.

Keep well.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _May 13th._--French occupy Vienna, after a bombardment of
  thirty-six hours.

  _May 17th._--Roman States united to the French Empire.

  _May 18th._--French occupy Trieste.

  _May 19th._--Lefebvre occupies Innsbruck.

  _May 20th._--Eugène reaches Klagenfurt.

  _May 21st-22nd._--Battle of Essling. A drawn battle, unfavourable
  to the French, who lose Marshal Lannes, three generals killed, and
  500 officers and 18,000 men wounded. The Archduke admits a loss of
  4200 killed and 16,000 wounded.

  _May 22nd._--Meerveldt with 4000 men surrenders at Laybach to
  Macdonald.

  _May 25th._--Eugène reaches Leoben in Styria, and captures most of
  the corps of Jellachich.

  _May 26th._--Eugène joins the army of Germany, at Bruck in
  Styria.


No. 4.

  _May 12th._--Soult evacuates Portugal. Wellington crosses the
  Douro, and enters Spain.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Schoenbrunn, May 12, 1809._

I am despatching the brother of the Duchess of Montebello to let you
know that I am master of Vienna, and that everything here goes
perfectly. My health is very good.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 5.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Ebersdorf, May 27, 1809._

I am despatching a page to tell you that Eugène has rejoined me with
all his army; that he has completely performed the task that I
entrusted him with; and has almost entirely destroyed the enemy's army
opposed to him.

I send you my proclamation to the army of Italy, which will make you
understand all this.

I am very well.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

_P.S._--You can have this proclamation printed at Strasburg, and have
it translated into French and German, in order that it may be
scattered broadcast over Germany. Give a copy of the proclamation to
the page who goes on to Paris.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _May 28th._--Hofer defeats Bavarians at Innsbruck.


No. 6.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Ebersdorf_, _May 29, 1809_, 7 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I have been here since yesterday; I am stopped by the
river. The bridge has been burnt; I shall cross at midnight.
Everything here goes as I wish it, viz., very well.

The Austrians have been overwhelmed (_frappès de la foudre_).

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 7.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Ebersdorf May 31, 1809._

Your letter of the 26th to hand. I have written you that you can go to
Plombières. I do not care for you to go to Baden; it is not necessary
to leave France. I have ordered the two princes to re-enter
France.[33]

The loss of the Duke of Montebello, who died this morning, has grieved
me exceedingly. Thus everything ends!!

Adieu, dear; if you can help to console the poor Maréchale, do
so.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 1st._--Archduke Ferdinand evacuates Warsaw.

  _June 6th._--Regent of Sweden proclaimed King as Charles XIII.


No. 8.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT STRASBURG.

  _Schoenbrunn, June 9, 1809._

I have received your letter; I see with pleasure that you are going to
the waters at Plombières, they will do you good.

Eugène is in Hungary with his army. I am well, the weather very fine.
I note with pleasure that Hortense and the Duke of Berg are in
France.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 10th._--Union of the Papal States to France promulgated in
  Rome.

  _June 11th.--Napoleon and all his abettors excommunicated._

  _June 14th._--Eugène, aided by Macdonald and Lauriston, defeats
  Archduke Ferdinand at Raab.


No. 9.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Schoenbrunn, June 16, 1809._

I despatch a page to tell you that, on the 14th, the anniversary of
Marengo, Eugène won a battle against the Archduke John and the
Archduke Palatine, at Raab, in Hungary; that he has taken 3000 men,
many pieces of cannon, 4 flags, and pursued them a long way on the
road to Buda-Pesth.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 18th._--Combat of Belchite. Blake defeated by Suchet near
  Saragossa.


No. 10.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Schoenbrunn, June 19, 1809, Noon._

I have your letter, which tells me of your departure for Plombières. I
am glad you are making this journey, because I trust it may do you
good.

Eugène is in Hungary, and is well. My health is very good, and the
army in fighting trim.

I am very glad to know that the Grand Duke of Berg is with you.

Adieu, dear. You know my affection for my Josephine; it never
varies.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 4th-5th._--French cross Danube, and win battle of
  Enzersdorff.

  _July 5th-6th._--Pope Pius VII. carried off from Rome by order of
  Murat; eventually kept at Savona.

  _July 6th.--Battle of Wagram._ The most formidable artillery
  battle ever fought up to this date (900 guns in action). The
  Austrians had 120,000 men, with more guns and of larger calibre
  than those of the French.


No. 11.

  _July 7th._--St. Domingo surrenders to the English.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Ebersdorf_, _July 7, 1809_, 5 A.M.

I am despatching a page to bring you the good tidings of the victory
of Enzersdorf, which I won on the 5th, and that of Wagram, which I won
on the 6th.

The enemy's army flies in disorder, and all goes according to my
prayers (_voeux_).

Eugène is well. Prince Aldobrandini is wounded, but slightly.

Bessières has been shot through the fleshy part of his thigh; the
wound is very slight. Lasalle was killed. My losses are full heavy,
but the victory is decisive and complete. We have taken more than 100
pieces of cannon, 12 flags, many prisoners.

I am sunburnt.

Adieu, dear. I send you a kiss. Kind regards to Hortense.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 12.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Wolkersdorf_, _July 9, 1809_, 2 A.M.

_My Dear_,--All goes here as I wish. My enemies are defeated, beaten,
utterly routed. They were in great numbers; I have wiped them out.
To-day my health is good; yesterday I was rather ill with a surfeit of
bile, occasioned by so many hardships, but it has done me much good.

Adieu, dear. I am in excellent health.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 12th._--Armistice of Znaim. Archduke Charles resigns his
  command.


No. 13.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _In the Camp, before Znaim, July 13, 1809._

I send you the suspension of arms concluded yesterday with the
Austrian General. Eugène is on the Hungary side, and is well. Send a
copy of the suspension of arms to Cambacérès, in case he has not yet
received one.

I send you a kiss, and am very well.

  NAPOLEON.

You may cause this suspension of arms to be printed at Nancy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 14th._--English seize Senegal. Oudinot, Marmont, Macdonald
  made Marshals.


No. 14.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Schoenbrunn, July 17, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I have sent you one of my pages. You will have learnt the
result of the battle of Wagram, and, later, of the suspension of arms
of Znaim.

My health is good. Eugène is well, and I long to know that you, as
well as Hortense, are the same.

Give a kiss for me to Monsieur, the Grand Duke of Berg.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 15.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Schoenbrunn, July 24, 1809._

I have just received yours of July 18th. I note with pleasure that the
waters are doing you good. I see no objection to you going back to
Malmaison after you have finished your treatment.

It is hot enough here in all conscience. My health is excellent.

Adieu, dear. Eugène is at Vienna, in the best of health.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 28th.--Battle of Talavera._ Wellington repulses Victor, who
  attacks by King Joseph's order, without waiting for the arrival of
  Soult with the main army. Wellington retires on Portugal.

  _July 29th-31st._--Walcheren Expedition; 17,000 English land in
  Belgium.


No. 16.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PLOMBIÈRES.

  _Schoenbrunn, August 7, 1809._

I see from your letter that you are at Plombières, and intend to stay
there. You do well; the waters and the fine climate can only do you
good.

I remain here. My health and my affairs follow my wishes.

Please give my kind regards to Hortense and the Napoleons.--Yours
ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _August 8th._--Combat of Arzobispo. Soult defeats the Spaniards.

  _August 15th._--Flushing surrenders to the English.


No. 17.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT PARIS.

  _Schoenbrunn, August 21, 1809._

I have received your letter of August 14th, from Plombières; I see
from it that by the 18th you will be either at Paris or Malmaison. The
heat, which is very great here, will have upset you. Malmaison must be
very dry and parched at this time of year.

My health is good. The heat, however, has brought on a slight
catarrh.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 18.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Schoenbrunn, August 26, 1809._

I have your letter from Malmaison. They bring me word that you are
plump, florid, and in the best of health, I assure you Vienna is not
an amusing city. I would very much rather be back again in Paris.

Adieu, dear. Twice a week I listen to the comedians (_bouffons_); they
are but very middling; it, however, passes the evenings. There are
fifty or sixty women of Vienna, but outsiders (_au parterre_), as not
having been presented.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 19.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Schoenbrunn, August 31, 1809._

I have had no letter from you for several days; the pleasures of
Malmaison, the beautiful greenhouses, the beautiful gardens, cause the
absent to be forgotten. It is, they say, the rule of your sex. Every
one speaks only of your good health; all this is very suspicious.

To-morrow I am off with Eugène for two days in Hungary.

My health is fairly good.

Adieu, dear.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 20.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Krems, September 9, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I arrived here yesterday at 2 A.M.; I have come here to
see my troops. My health has never been better. I know that you are
very well.

I shall be in Paris at a moment when nobody will expect me. Everything
here goes excellently and to my satisfaction.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 21.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Schoenbrunn, September 23, 1809._

I have received your letter of the 16th, and note that you are well.
The old maid's house is only worth 120,000[34] francs; they will never
get more for it. Still, I leave you mistress to do what you like,
since it amuses you; only, once purchased, don't pull it down to put a
rockery there.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 22.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Schoenbrunn, September 25, 1809._

I have received your letter. Be careful, and I advise you to be
vigilant, for one of these nights you will hear a loud knocking.

My health is good. I know nothing about the rumours; I have never been
better for many a long year. Corvisart was no use to me.

Adieu, dear; everything here prospers.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _September 26th._--Battle of Silistria; Turks defeat Russians.


No. 23.

  _October 14th._--Treaty of Vienna, between France and Austria.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Schoenbrunn, October 14, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I write to advise you that Peace was signed two hours ago
between Champagny and Prince Metternich.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _October 19th._--Mortier routs Spaniards at Oçana.


No. 24.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Nymphenburg, near Munich, October 21, 1809._

I arrived here yesterday in the best of health, but shall not start
till to-morrow. I shall spend a day at Stuttgard. You will be advised
twenty-four hours in advance of my arrival at Fontainebleau.

I look forward with pleasure to seeing you again, and I await that
moment impatiently.

I send you a kiss.--Yours ever,

  NAPOLEON.


No. 25.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Munich, October 22, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I start in an hour. I shall be at Fontainebleau from the
26th to 27th; you may meet me there with some of your ladies.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _November 25th._--Disappearance of Benjamin Bathurst, erroneously
  thought to have been murdered by the French, really by robbers.

  _December 1st._--Capture of Gerona and 200 cannon by Augereau.

  _December 16th.--French Senate pronounce the divorce of Napoleon
  and Josephine._

  _December 24th._--English re-embark from Flushing.


FOOTNOTES

  [32] Napoleon Louis, Prince Royal of Holland, and Grand Duke of Berg
       from March 3, 1809.

  [33] Her two grandsons, who, with Hortense, their mother, were at
       Baden.

  [34] Boispréau, belonging to Mademoiselle Julien.




SERIES M


"Josephine, my excellent Josephine, thou knowest if I have loved thee!
To thee, to thee alone do I owe the only moments of happiness which I
have enjoyed in this world. Josephine, my destiny overmasters my will.
My dearest affections must be silent before the interests of
France."--BOURRIENNE'S _Napoleon_.[35]


FOOTNOTES

  [35] Also MEME'S _Memoirs of Josephine_, p. 333.




SERIES M

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 295-304.)


  LETTER                                       PAGE

  No. 1. A Family Council                       295

  No. 2. _Savary_                               297
         _Queen of Naples_                      298
         _The hunt_                             298

  No. 4. _The weather is very damp_             298

  No. 5. _King of Bavaria_                      299

  No. 6. Their last dinner together             299

  No. 7. _Tuileries_                            299

  No. 8. _A house vacant in Paris_              299

  No. 9. _Hortense_                             300

  No. 10. A visit to Josephine                  300

  No. 11. _What charms your society has_        300

  No. 12. _King of Westphalia_                  301

  No. 13. _Sensible_                            301

  No. 14. _D'Audenarde_                         302

  No. 16. The choosing of a bride               302

  No. 17. Date                                  302

  Nos. 18 & 19. _L'Élysée_                    302-3

  No. 20. _Bessières' country-house_            303

  No. 21. _Rambouillet_                         303
          _Adieu_                               303




LETTERS OF THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE AFTER THE
DIVORCE AND BEFORE HIS MARRIAGE WITH MARIE LOUISE.

DECEMBER, 1809, TO APRIL 2, 1810.


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _December 1809_, 8 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I found you to-day weaker than you ought to be. You have
shown courage; it is necessary that you should maintain it and not
give way to a doleful melancholy. You must be contented and take
special care of your health, which is so precious to me.

If you are attached to me and if you love me, you should show strength
of mind and force yourself to be happy. You cannot question my
constant and tender friendship, and you would know very imperfectly
all the affection I have for you if you imagined that I can be happy
if you are unhappy, and contented if you are ill at ease.

Adieu, dear. Sleep well; dream that I wish it.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Tuesday, 6 o'clock._

The Queen of Naples, whom I saw at the hunt in the Bois de Boulogne,
where I rode down a stag, told me that she left you yesterday at 1
P.M. in the best of health.

Please tell me what you are doing to-day. As for me, I am very well.
Yesterday, when I saw you, I was ill. I expect you will have been for
a drive.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Trianon_, 7 P.M.

_My Dear_,--I have just received your letter. Savary tells me that you
are always crying; that is not well. I trust that you have been for a
drive to-day. I sent you my quarry. I shall come to see you when you
tell me you are reasonable, and that your courage has the upper hand.

To-morrow, the whole day, I am receiving Ministers.

Adieu, dear. I also am sad to-day; I need to know that you are
satisfied and to learn that your equilibrium (_aplomb_) is restored.
Sleep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 4.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Thursday, Noon, 1809._

_My Dear_,--I wished to come and see you to-day, but I was very busy
and rather unwell. Still, I am just off to the Council.

Please tell me how you are.

This weather is very damp, and not at all healthy.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 5.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Trianon._

I should have come to see you to-day if I had not been obliged to come
to see the King of Bavaria, who has just arrived in Paris. I shall
come to see you to-night at eight o'clock, and return at ten.

I hope to see you to-morrow, and to see you cheerful and placid.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 6.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Trianon, Tuesday._

_My Dear_,--I lay down after you left me yesterday;[36] I am going to
Paris. I wish to hear that you are cheerful. I shall come to see you
during the week.

I have received your letters, which I am going to read in the
carriage.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 7.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Paris, Wednesday, Noon, 27th December 1809._

Eugène told me that you were very miserable all yesterday. That is not
well, my dear; it is contrary to what you promised me.

I have been thoroughly tired in revisiting the Tuileries; that great
palace seemed empty to me, and I felt lost in it.

Adieu, dear. Keep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 8.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Paris, Sunday, December 31_, 10 A.M., 1809.

_My Dear_,--To-day I have a grand parade; I shall see all my Old Guard
and more than sixty artillery trains.

The King of Westphalia is returning home, which will leave a house
vacant in Paris. I am sad not to see you. If the parade finishes
before 3 o'clock, I will come; otherwise, to-morrow.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 9.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Thursday Evening_, 1810.

_My Dear_,--Hortense, whom I saw this afternoon, has given me news of
you. I trust that you will have been able to see your plants to-day,
the weather having been fine. I have only been out for a few minutes
at three o'clock to shoot some hares.

Adieu, dear; sleep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 10.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Friday_, 8 P.M., 1810.

I wished to come and see you to-day, but I cannot; it will be, I hope,
in the morning. It is a long time since I heard from you. I learnt
with pleasure that you take walks in your garden these cold days.

Adieu, dear; keep well, and never doubt my affection.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 11.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Sunday_, 8 P.M., 1810.

I was very glad to see you yesterday; I feel what charms your society
has for me.

To-day I walked with Estève.[37] I have allowed £4000 for 1810, for
the extraordinary expenses at Malmaison. You can therefore do as much
planting as you like; you will distribute that sum as you may require.
I have instructed Estève to send £8000 the moment the contract for the
Maison Julien shall be made. I have ordered them to pay for your
_parure_ of rubies, which will be valued by the Department, for I do
not wish to be robbed by jewellers. So, there goes the £16,000 that
this may cost me.

I have ordered them to hold the million which the Civil List owes you
for 1810 at the disposal of your man of business, in order to pay your
debts.

You should find in the coffers of Malmaison twenty to twenty-five
thousand pounds; you can take them to buy your plate and linen.

I have instructed them to make you a very fine porcelain service; they
will take your commands in order that it may be a very fine one.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 12.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Wednesday_, 6 P.M., 1810.

_My Dear_,--I see no objection to your receiving the King of
Westphalia whenever you wish. The King and Queen of Bavaria will
probably come to see you on Friday.

I long to come to Malmaison, but you must really show fortitude and
self-restraint; the page on duty this morning told me that he saw you
weeping.

I am going to dine quite alone.

Adieu, dear. Never doubt the depth of my feelings for you; you would
be unjust and unfair if you did.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 13.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Saturday_, 1 P.M., 1810.

_My Dear_,--Yesterday I saw Eugène, who told me that you gave a
reception to the kings. I was at the concert till eight o'clock, and
only dined, quite alone, at that hour.

I long to see you. If I do not come to-day, I will come after mass.

Adieu, dear. I hope to find you sensible and in good health. This
weather should indeed make you put on flesh.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _January 9.--The clergy of Paris annul the religious marriage of
  Napoleon with Josephine_ (so _Biographie Universelle_, Michaud;
  Montgaillard gives January 18). _Confirmed by the Metropolitan
  Officialité, January 12_ (Pasquier).


No. 14.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Trianon, January 17, 1810._

_My Dear_,--D'Audenarde, whom I sent to you this morning, tells me
that since you have been at Malmaison you have no longer any courage.
Yet that place is full of our happy memories, which can and ought
never to change, at least on my side.

I want badly to see you, but I must have some assurance that you are
strong and not weak; I too am rather like you, and it makes me
frightfully wretched.

Adieu, Josephine; good-night. If you doubted me, you would be very
ungrateful.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 15.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _January 20, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I send you the box that I promised you the day before
yesterday--representing the Island of Lobau. I was rather tired
yesterday. I work much, and do not go out.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 16.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Noon, Tuesday, 1810._

I hear that you are making yourself miserable; this is too bad. You
have no confidence in me, and all the rumours that are being spread
strike you; this is not knowing me, Josephine. I am much annoyed, and
if I do not find you cheerful and contented, I shall scold you right
well.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 17.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Sunday_, 9 P.M., 1810.

_My Dear_,--I was very glad to see you the day before yesterday.

I hope to go to Malmaison during the week. I have had all your affairs
looked after here, and ordered that everything be brought to the
Elysée-Napoléon.

Please take care of yourself.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 18.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _January 30, 1810._

_My Dear_,--Your letter to hand. I hope the walk you had yesterday, in
order to show people your conservatories, has done you good.

I will gladly see you at the Elysée, and shall be very glad to see you
oftener, for you know how I love you.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 19.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Saturday_, 6 P.M., 1810.

I told Eugène that you would rather give ear to the vulgar gossip of a
great city than to what I told you; yet people should not be allowed
to invent fictions to make you miserable.

I have had all your effects moved to the Elysée. You shall come to
Paris at once; but be at ease and contented, and have full confidence
in me.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February 2._--Soult occupies Seville. The Junta takes refuge at
  Cadiz.

  _February 6._--Guadeloupe surrenders to the English.

  _February 7.--Convention of marriage between the Emperor Napoleon
  and the Archduchess Marie Louise._


No. 20.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT THE ELYSÉE-NAPOLEON.

  _February 19, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter. I long to see you, but the
reflections that you make may be true. It is, perhaps, not desirable
that we should be under the same roof for the first year. Yet
Bessières' country-house is too far off to go and return in one day;
moreover I have rather a cold, and am not sure of being able to go
there.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 21.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT THE ELYSÉE-NAPOLEON.

  _Friday_, 6 P.M., 1810.

Savary, as soon as he arrived, brought me your letter; I am sorry to
see you are unhappy. I am very glad that you saw nothing of the fire.

I had fine weather at Rambouillet.

Hortense told me that you had some idea of coming to a dinner at
Bessières, and of returning to Paris to sleep. I am sorry that you
have not been able to manage it.

Adieu, dear. Be cheerful, and consider how much you please me
thereby.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 22.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _March 12, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I trust that you will be pleased with what I have done for
Navarre. You must see from that how anxious I am to make myself
agreeable to you.

Get ready to take possession of Navarre; you will go there on March
25, to pass the month of April.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _April 1.--Civil marriage of Napoleon and Marie Louise._
  (_Religious marriage, April 2._)


FOOTNOTES

  [36] The Empress, with Hortense, had been to dine at Trianon.

  [37] General Treasurer of the Crown.




SERIES N

1810

APRIL 2ND--DECEMBER 31ST

(_after the Marriage with Marie Louise_).

"Bella gerant alii, tu, felix Austria! nube."




SERIES N

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 304-310.)


  LETTER                                              PAGE

  No. 1. _Navarre_                                     304
         _To Malmaison_                                305

  No. 1_a_. _It is written in a bad style_             305

  No. 2. Josephine's wishes                            305

  No. 2_a_. _Two letters_                              306

  No. 3. The northern tour of 1810                     306
         _I will come to see you_                      307

  No. 4. _July 8th_                                    308
         _You will have seen Eugène_                   308
         _That unfortunate daughter_                   308

  No. 5. _The conduct of the King of Holland_          308

  No. 6. _To die in a lake_                            309

  No. 8. _Paris, this Friday_                          309

  No. 9. _The only suitable places_                    310

  No. 10. Malmaison                                    310
          _The Empress progresses satisfactorily_      310


No. 1.

LETTER OF THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE TO THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON.

  _Navarre, April 19, 1810._

_Sire_,-I have received, by my son, the assurance that your Majesty
consents to my return to Malmaison, and grants to me the advances
asked for in order to make the château of Navarre habitable. This
double favour, Sire, dispels to a great extent the uneasiness, nay,
even the fears which your Majesty's long silence had inspired. I was
afraid that I might be entirely banished from your memory; I see that
I am not. I am therefore less wretched to-day, and even as happy as
henceforward it will be possible for me to be.

I shall go at the end of the month to Malmaison, since your Majesty
sees no objection to it. But I ought to tell you, Sire, that I should
not so soon have taken advantage of the latitude which your Majesty
left me in this respect had the house of Navarre not required, for my
health's sake and for that of my household, repairs which are urgent.
My idea is to stay at Malmaison a very short time; I shall soon leave
it in order to go to the waters. But while I am at Malmaison, your
Majesty may be sure that I shall live there as if I were a thousand
leagues from Paris. I have made a great sacrifice, Sire, and every day
I realise more its full extent. Yet that sacrifice will be, as it
ought to be, a complete one on my part. Your Highness, amid your
happiness, shall be troubled by no expression of my regret.

I shall pray unceasingly for your Majesty's happiness, perhaps even I
shall pray that I may see you again; but your Majesty may be assured
that I shall always respect our new relationship. I shall respect it
in silence, relying on the attachment that you had to me formerly; I
shall call for no new proof; I shall trust to everything from your
justice and your heart.

I limit myself to asking from you one favour: it is, that you will
deign to find a way of sometimes convincing both myself and my
_entourage_ that I have still a small place in your memory and a great
place in your esteem and friendship. By this means, whatever happens,
my sorrows will be mitigated without, as it seems to me, compromising
that which is of permanent importance to me, the happiness of your
Majesty.

  JOSEPHINE.


No. 1A.

(_Reply of the Emperor Napoleon to the preceding._)

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT NAVARRE.

  _Compiègne, April 21, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have yours of April 18th; it is written in a bad style.
I am always the same; people like me do not change. I know not what
Eugène has told you. I have not written to you because you have not
written to me, and my sole desire is to fulfil your slightest
inclination.

I see with pleasure that you are going to Malmaison and that you are
contented; as for me, I shall be so likewise on hearing news from you
and in giving you mine. I say no more about it until you have compared
this letter with yours, and after that I will leave you to judge which
of us two is the better friend.

Adieu, dear; keep well, and be just for your sake and mine.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _April 23rd._--Battle of Lerida. Suchet defeats Spaniards.


No. 2.

REPLY OF THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE.

A thousand, thousand loving thanks for not having forgotten me. My son
has just brought me your letter. With what impetuosity I read it, and
yet I took a long time over it, for there was not a word which did not
make me weep; but these tears were very pleasant ones. I have found my
whole heart again--such as it will always be; there are affections
which are life itself, and which can only end with it.

I was in despair to find my letter of the 19th had displeased you; I
do not remember the exact expressions, but I know what torture I felt
in writing it--the grief at having no news from you.

I wrote you on my departure from Malmaison, and since then how often
have I wished to write you! but I appreciated the causes of your
silence and feared to be importunate with a letter. Yours has been the
true balm for me. Be happy, be as much so as you deserve; it is my
whole heart which speaks to you. You have also just given me my share
of happiness, and a share which I value the most, for nothing can
equal in my estimation a proof that you still remember me.

Adieu, dear; I again thank you as affectionately as I shall always
love you.

  JOSEPHINE.


No. 2A.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT THE CHÂTEAU NAVARRE.

  _Compiègne, April 28, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have just received two letters from you. I am writing to
Eugène. I have ordered that the marriage of Tascher with the Princess
de la Leyen shall take place.

To-morrow I shall go to Antwerp to see my fleet and to give orders
about the works. I shall return on May 15th.

Eugène tells me that you wish to go to the waters; trouble yourself
about nothing. Do not listen to the gossip of Paris; it is idle and
far from knowing the real state of things. My affection for you does
not change, and I long to know that you are happy and contented.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

_My Dear_,--I have your letter. Eugène will give you tidings of my
journey and of the Empress. I am very glad that you are going to the
waters. I trust they may do you good.

I wish very much to see you. If you are at Malmaison at the end of the
month, I will come to see you. I expect to be at St. Cloud on the 30th
of the month. My health is very good ... it only needs to hear that
you are contented and well. Let me know in what name you intend to
travel.

Never doubt the whole truth of my affection for you; it will last as
long as I. You would be very unjust if you doubted it.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 1st.--Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland, abdicates in favour
  of his son._


No. 4.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT THE WATERS OF AIX, IN SAVOY.

  _Rambouillet, July 8, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have your letter of July 8th. You will have seen Eugène,
and his presence will have done you good. I learn with pleasure that
the waters are beneficial to you. The King of Holland has just
abdicated the throne, while leaving the Regency, according to the
Constitution, in the hands of the Queen. He has quitted Amsterdam and
left the Grand Duke of Berg behind.

I have reunited Holland to France, which has, however, the advantage
of setting the Queen at liberty, and that[38] unfortunate girl is
coming to Paris with her son the Grand Duke of Berg--that will make
her perfectly happy.

My health is good. I have come here to hunt for a few days. I shall
see you this autumn with pleasure. Never doubt my friendship; I never
change.

Keep well, be cheerful, and believe in the truth of my attachment.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _July 9th._--Holland incorporated with the French Empire.

  _July 10th._--Ney takes Ciudad Rodrigo, after twenty-five days
  open trenches.


No. 5.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT THE WATERS OF AIX, IN SAVOY.

  _St. Cloud, July 20, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter of July 14th, and note with
pleasure that the waters are doing you good, and that you like Geneva.
I think that you are doing well to go there for a few weeks.

My health is fairly good. The conduct of the King of Holland has
worried me.

Hortense is shortly coming to Paris. The Grand Duke of Berg is on his
way; I expect him to-morrow.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 6.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT THE WATERS OF AIX, IN SAVOY.

  _Trianon, August 10, 1810._

Your letter to hand. I was pained to see what a risk you had run. For
an inhabitant of the isles of the ocean to die in a lake would have
been a fatality indeed!

The Queen is better, and I hope her health will be re-established. Her
husband is in Bohemia, apparently not knowing what to do.

I am fairly well, and beg you to believe in my sincere attachment.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _August 21st._--Swedes elect Marshal Bernadotte Crown Prince of
  Sweden.

  _August 27th._--Massena takes Almeida.


No. 7.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT THE WATERS OF AIX, IN SAVOY.

  _St. Cloud, September 14, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have your letter of September 9th. I learn with pleasure
that you keep well. There is no longer the slightest doubt that the
Empress has entered on the fourth month of her pregnancy; she is well,
and is much attached to me. The young Princes Napoleon are very well;
they are in the Pavillon d'Italie, in the Park of St. Cloud.

My health is fairly good. I wish to learn that you are happy and
contented. I hear that one of your _entourage_ has broken a leg while
going on the glacier.

Adieu, dear. Never doubt the interest I take in you and the affection
that I bear towards you.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _September 27th.--Battle of Busaco._ Like Ebersburg, another of
  Massena's expensive and unnecessary frontal attacks. He loses 5000
  men, but next day turns the position of Wellington, who continues
  to retire.


No. 8.

TO THE EMPRESS, AT MALMAISON.

  _Paris, this Friday._

_My Dear_,--Yours to hand. I am sorry to see that you have been ill; I
fear it must be this bad weather.

Madame de la T---- is one of the most foolish women of the Faubourg. I
have borne her cackle for a very long time; I am sick of it, and have
ordered that she does not come again to Paris. There are five or six
other old women that I equally wish to send away from Paris; they are
spoiling the young ones by their follies.

I will name Madame de Makau Baroness since you wish it, and carry out
your other commissions.

My health is pretty good. The conduct of B---- appears to me very
ridiculous. I trust to hear that you are better.

Adieu, dear.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 9.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT GENEVA.

  _Fontainebleau, October 1, 1810._

I have received your letter. Hortense, whom I have seen, will have
told you what I think. Go to see your son this winter; come back to
the waters of Aix next year, or, still better, wait for the spring at
Navarre. I would advise you to go to Navarre at once, if I did not
fear you would get tired of it. In my view, the only suitable places
for you this winter are either Milan or Navarre; after that, I approve
of whatever you may do, for I do not wish to vex you in anything.

Adieu, dear. The Empress is as I told you in my last letter. I am
naming Madame de Montesquiou governess of the Children of France. Be
contented, and do not get excited; never doubt my affection for you.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _October 6th._--Wellington reaches the lines of Torres Vedras.

  _November 9th._--Opening of St. Quentin Canal at Paris.


No. 10.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT NAVARRE.

  _Fontainebleau, November 14, 1810._

_My Dear_,--I have received your letter. Hortense has spoken to me
about it. I note with pleasure that you are contented. I hope that you
are not very tired of Navarre.

My health is very good. The Empress progresses satisfactorily. I will
do the various things you ask regarding your household. Take care of
your health, and never doubt my affection for you.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 11.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT NAVARRE.

I have your letter. I see no objection to the marriage of Mackau with
Wattier, if he wishes it; this general is a very brave man. I am in
good health. I hope to have a son; I shall let you know immediately.

Adieu, dear. I am very glad that Madame d'Arberg[39] has told you
things which please you. When you see me, you will find me with my old
affection for you.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _December 3rd._--English take Mauritius.


FOOTNOTES

  [38] So _Collection Didot_, followed by Aubenas. St. Amand has "ton
       infortunée fille."

  [39] Josephine's chief maid-of-honour.




SERIES O


1811

  "Nun steht das Reich gesichert, wie gegründet,
  Nun fühlt er froh im Sohne sich gegründet.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Und sei durch Sie dies letzte Glück beschieden--
  Der alles wollen kann, will auch den Frieden."

  --GOETHE (_Ihro der Kaiserin von Frankreich Majestät_).




SERIES O

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 311-312.)


  LETTER                                           PAGE

  No. 1. _The New Year_                             311
         _More women than men_                      311
         _Keep well_                                311

  No. 2. Birth of the King of Rome                  311
         _Eugène_                                   311

  No. 4. _As fat as a good Normandy farmeress_      312


No. 1.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT NAVARRE.

  _Paris, January 8th, 1811._

I have your New Year's letter. I thank you for its contents. I note
with pleasure that you are well and happy. I hear that there are more
women than men at Navarre.

My health is excellent, though I have not been out for a fortnight.
Eugène appears to have no fears about his wife; he gives you a
grandson.

Adieu, dear; keep well.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February 19th._--Soult defeats Spaniards at the Gébora, near
  Badajoz.

  _February 28th._--French occupy Duchy of Oldenburg, to complete
  the line of the North Sea blockade against England. This
  occupation embitters the Emperor of Russia and his family.

  _March 10th._--Mortier captures Badajoz after a siege of 54 days.

  _March 20th._--Birth of the _King of Rome_--"a pompous title
  buried in the tomb of the Ostrogoths."


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT NAVARRE.

  _Paris, March 22nd, 1811._

_My Dear_,--I have your letter. I thank you for it.

My son is fat, and in excellent health. I trust he may continue to
improve. He has my chest, my mouth, and my eyes. I hope he may fulfil
his destiny. I am always well pleased with Eugène; he has never given
me the least anxiety.

  NAPOLEON.

  _April 4th._--Battle of Fuentes d'Onoro. Massena attacks English,
  and is repulsed.

  _June 18th._--Wellington raises siege of Badajoz, and retires on
  Portugal.

  _June 29th._--French storm Tarragona, whereupon Suchet created
  Marshal.


No. 3.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

  _Trianon, August 25th, 1811._

I have your letter. I see with pleasure that you are in good health. I
have been for some days at Trianon. I expect to go to Compiègne. My
health is very good.

Put some order into your affairs. Spend only £60,000, and save as much
every year; that will make a reserve of £600,000 in ten years for your
grandchildren. It is pleasant to be able to give them something, and
be helpful to them. Instead of that, I hear you have debts, which
would be really too bad. Look after your affairs, and don't give to
every one who wants to help himself. If you wish to please me, let me
hear that you have accumulated a large fortune. Consider how ill I
must think of you, if I know that you, with £125,000 a year, are in
debt.

Adieu, dear; keep well.

  NAPOLEON.


No. 4.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

  _Friday_, 8 A.M., 1811.

I send to know how you are, for Hortense tells me you were in bed
yesterday. I was annoyed with you about your debts. I do not wish you
to have any; on the contrary, I wish you to put a million aside every
year, to give to your grandchildren when they get married.

Nevertheless, never doubt my affection for you, and don't worry any
more about the present embarrassment.

Adieu, dear. Send me word that you are well. They say that you are as
fat as a good Normandy farmeress.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _October 25th-26th._--Battle of Murviedro and capture of Sagunto:
  Blake and O'Donnell heavily defeated by Suchet.

  _December 20th._--Senatus Consultus puts 120,000 conscripts (born
  in 1792) at disposal of Government for 1812.

  _December 26th._--Suchet defeats Spanish, and crosses Guadalaviar.




SERIES P


1812

  "'Tis the same landscape which the modern Mars saw
  Who march'd to Moscow, led by Fame, the siren!
  To lose by one month's frost, some twenty years
  Of conquest, and his guard of grenadiers."

  --BYRON (_Don Juan_, canto x. stanza 58).




SERIES P

(For subjoined Notes to this Series see pages 312-315.)


  LETTER                  PAGE

  No. 1. Konigsberg        312

  No. 2. _Gumbinnen_       313


1812.

  Montgaillard sums up his tirade against Napoleon for the Russian
  campaign by noting that it took the Romans _ten_ years to conquer
  Gaul, while Napoleon "would not give _two_ to the conquest of that
  vast desert of Scythia which forced Darius to flee, Alexander to
  draw back, Crassus to perish; where Julian terminated his career,
  where Valerian covered himself with shame, and which saw the
  disasters of Charles XII."

  _January 9th._--Suchet captures Valencia, 18,000 Spanish troops,
  and 400 cannon. The marshal is made Duke of Albuféra.

  _January 15th._--Imperial decree ordains 100,000 acres to be put
  under cultivation of beetroot, for the manufacture of indigenous
  sugar.

  _January 19th._--Taking of Ciudad Rodrigo by Wellington.

  _January 26th._--French, under General Friand, occupy Stralsund
  and Swedish Pomerania.

  _February 24th._--Treaty of alliance between France and Prussia;
  the latter to support France in case of a war with Russia.

  _March 13th._--Senatus Consultus divides the National Guards into
  three bans, to include all capable men not already in military
  service. They are not to serve outside France. A hundred cohorts,
  each 970 strong, of the first ban (men between 20 and 26), put at
  disposal of Government.

  _March 14th._--Treaty between France and Austria; reciprocal help,
  in need, of 30,000 men and 60 guns. The integrity of European
  Turkey mutually guaranteed.

  _March 26th._--Treaty between Russia and Sweden. Bernadotte is
  promised Norway by Alexander.

  _April 7th._--The English take Badajoz by assault. "The French
  General, Philippon, with but 3000 men, has been besieged thrice
  within thirteen months by armies of 50,000 men" (_Montgaillard_).

  _April 24th._--Alexander leaves St. Petersburg, to take command of
  his Grand Army.

  _May 9th.--Napoleon leaves Paris for Germany._

  _May 11th._--Assassination of English Prime Minister, Perceval.

  _May 17th-28th.--Napoleon at Dresden; joined there by the Emperor
  and Empress of Austria, and a fresh_ "parterre _of kings"._

  _May 28th._---Treaty of Bucharest, between Turkey and Russia. The
  Pruth as boundary, and Servia restored to Turkey. This treaty, so
  fatal to Napoleon, and of which he only heard in October, was
  mainly the work of Stratford de Redcliffe, then aged twenty-five.
  Wellington, thinking the treaty his brother's work, speaks of it
  as "the most important service that ever fell to the lot of any
  individual to perform."


No. 1.

  _June 12th._--Suchet defeats an Anglo-Spanish army outside
  Tarragona.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

  _June 12th, 1812._

_My Dear_,--I shall always receive news from you with great interest.

The waters will, I hope, do you good, and I shall see you with much
pleasure on your return.

Never doubt the interest I feel in you. I will arrange all the matters
of which you speak.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 16th._--Lord Liverpool Prime Minister of England.

  _June 18th._--United States declares war against England
  concerning rights of neutrals.

  _June 19th._--The captive Pope (Pius VII.) brought to Fontainebleau.


No. 2.

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, AT MALMAISON.

  _Gumbinnen, June 20th, 1812._

I have your letter of June 10th. I see no obstacle to your going to
Milan, to be near the Vice-Reine. You will do well to go _incognito_.
You will find it very hot.

My health is very good. Eugène is well, and is doing good work. Never
doubt the interest I have in you, and my friendship.

  NAPOLEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _June 22nd.--Napoleon from his headquarters, Wilkowyszki, declares
  war against Russia. His army comprised 550,000 men and 1200
  cannon, and he held sway at this epoch over 85,000,000 souls--half
  the then population of Europe._

  _June 24th._--French cross the Niemen, over 450,000 strong.[40] Of
  these 20,000 are Italians, 80,000 from Confederation of the Rhine,
  30,000 Poles, 30,000 Austrians, and 20,000 Prussians. The Russian
  army numbers 360,000.

  _June 28th._--French enter Wilna, the old capital of Lithuania.
  _Napoleon remains here till July 16th, establishing a provisional
  government, and leaving his Foreign Minister, Maret, there._

  _July 12th._--Americans invade Canada.

  _July 18th._--Treaty of peace between England and Sweden; and
  between Russia and the Spanish Regency at Cadiz.

  _July 22nd._--_Battle of Salamanca_ (Arapiles). Marmont defeated
  by Wellington, and badly wounded. French lose nearly 8000 men and
  5000 prisoners; English loss, 5200. The Spanish Regency had
  decided to submit to Joseph Bonaparte, but this battle deters
  them. French retire behind the Douro.

  _July 23rd._--Combat of Mohilow, on the Dneiper. Davoust defeats
  Bagration.

  _July 28th._--French enter Witepsk.

  _August 1st._--Treaty of alliance between Great Britain and
  Russia. English fleet henceforward guards the Gulf of Riga. Combat
  of Obaiarzma, on the bank of the Drissa. Marshal Oudinot defeats
  Wittgenstein. Russians lose 5000 men and 14 guns.

  _August 9th._--Battle of Brownstown (near Toronto). Americans
  defeated; surrender August 16th with 2500 men and 33 guns to
  General Brock.

  _August 12th._--Wellington enters Madrid.

  _August 17th-18th.--Battle and capture of Smolensk. Napoleon
  defeats Barclay de Tolly; Russians lose 12,000, French less than
  half._

  _August 18th._--Battle of Polotsk, fifty miles from Witepsk, down
  the Dwina. St. Cyr defeats Wittgenstein's much larger army, and
  takes 20 guns. (St. Cyr made marshal for this battle, August
  27th.)

  _August 19th._--Combat of Volontino-Cova, beyond Smolensk. Ney
  defeats Russians.

  _August 27th._--Norway guaranteed Sweden in lieu of Finland by
  Russia.

  _August 28th._--Interview at Abo, in Finland, between Alexander,
  Bernadotte, and Lord Cathcart (English ambassador). Decided that
  Sweden shall join the crusade against France, and that Moreau be
  imported from U.S.A. to command another army.

  _August 29th._--Viazma, burnt by Russians, entered by the French.

  _September 7th._--Battle of Borodino (_La Moskowa_). Nearly all
  the Russian generals are present: Barclay de Tolly, Beningsen,
  Bagration (who is killed), all under Kutusoff. Russians lose
  30,000 men, French 20,000, including many generals who had
  survived all the campaigns of the Revolution. The French, hungry
  and soaked in rain, have no energy to pursue.

  _September 14th._--Occupation of Moscow; fired by emissaries of
  Rostopchin, its late governor. Of 4000 stone houses only 200
  remain, of 8000 wooden ones 500. Over 20,000 sick and wounded
  burnt in their beds. Fire lasts till September 20th.

  _September 18th._--Russian Army of the Danube under Admiral
  Tschitchagow joins the Army of Reserve.

  _September 26th._--Russian troops from Finland disembark at Riga.

  _September 30th.--Napoleon finds a copy of Treaty of Bucharest at
  Moscow._

  _October 11th._--Admiral Tschitchagow with 36,000 men reaches
  Bresc, on the Bug, threatening the French communications with
  Warsaw.

  _October 17th-19th._--Second combat of Polotsk. Wittgenstein again
  defeated by St. Cyr, who is wounded.

  _October 18th._--Combat of Winkowo; Kutusoff defeats Murat.
  Americans defeated at Queenston Heights, on the Niagara, and lose
  900 men.

  _October 19th._--Commencement of the Retreat from Moscow.

  _October 22nd._--Burgos captured by Wellington.

  _October 23rd._--Conspiracy of Malet at Paris; Cambacérès to the
  rescue. Evacuation of Moscow by Mortier after forty days'
  occupation. The French army now retreating has only half its
  original strength, and the best cavalry regiments boast only 100
  horses.

  _October 24th.--Battle of Malo-Jaroslavitz. Eugène with 17,000_
  _men defeats Kutusoff with 60,000; but Napoleon finds the enemy
  too strong and too tenacious to risk the fertile Kaluga route._

  _November 3rd._--Battle of Wiazma. Rearguard action, in which Ney
  and Eugène are distinguished.

  _November 9th.--Napoleon reaches Smolensk and hears of Malet
  conspiracy._

  _November 14th._--Evacuation of Smolensk.

  _November 16th._--Russian Army (of the Danube) takes Minsk, and
  cuts off the French from the Niemen.

  _November 16th-19th._--Combat of Krasnoi, twenty-five miles west
  of Smolensk. Kutusoff with 30,000 horse and 70,000 foot tries to
  stop the French, who have only 25,000 effective combatants.
  Magnificent fighting by Ney with his rearguard of 6000.

  _November 21st._--Russians seize at Borizow the bridges over the
  Beresina, which are

  _November 23rd._--Retaken by Oudinot.

  _November 26th-28th._--French cross the Beresina, but lose 20,000
  prisoners and nearly all their cannon (150).

  _November 29th.--Napoleon writes Maret he has heard nothing of
  France or Spain for fifteen days._

  _December 3rd._--Twenty-ninth bulletin dated Malodeczna, fifty
  miles west of Borisow.

  _December 5th.--Napoleon reaches Smorgoni, and starts for
  France._

  _December 10th._--Murat, left in command, evacuates Wilna. French
  retreat in utter rout; "It is not General Kutusoff who routed the
  French, it is General Morosow" (the frost), said the Russians.

  _December 14th.--Napoleon reaches Dresden, and_

  _December 18th.--Paris._

  _December 19th._--Evacuation of Kovno and passage of the Niemen.

  _December 20th.--Napoleon welcomed by the Senate in a speech by
  the naturalist Lacépède: "The absence of your Majesty, sire, is
  always a national calamity."_

  _December 30th._--Defection of the Prussian General York and
  Convention of Taurogen, near Tilsit, between Russia and Prussia.
  This defection is the signal for the uprising of Germany from the
  Oder to the Rhine, from the Baltic to the Julienne Alps.


1813.

  _January 5th._--Konigsberg occupied by the Russians.

  _January 13th._--Senatus Consultus calls up 250,000 conscripts.

  _January 22nd._--Americans defeated at Frenchtown, near Detroit,
  and lose 1200 men.

  _January 25th.--Concordat at Fontainebleau between Napoleon and
  Pope Pius VII., with advantageous terms for the Papacy. The Pope,
  however, soon breaks faith._

  _January 28th.--Murat deserts the French army for Naples, and
  leaves Posen. "Your husband is very brave on the battlefield, but
  he is weaker than a woman or a monk when he is not face to face
  with an enemy. He has no moral courage"_ (_Napoleon to his sister
  Caroline, January 24, 1813._ Brotonne, 1032). _Replaced by Eugène
  (Napoleon's letter dated January 22nd)._

  _February 1st._--Proclamation of Louis XVIII. to the French people
  (dated London).

  _February 8th._--Warsaw surrenders to Russia.

  _February 10th._--Proclamation of Emperor Alexander calling on the
  people of Germany to shake off the yoke of "one man."

  _February 28th._--Sixth Continental Coalition against France.
  Treaty signed between Russia and Prussia at Kalisch.

  _March 3rd._--New treaty between England and Sweden at Stockholm:
  Sweden to receive a subsidy of a million sterling and the island
  of Guadaloupe in return for supporting the Coalition with 30,000
  men.

  _March 4th._--Cossacks occupy Berlin. Madison inaugurated
  President U.S.A.

  _March 9th._--Eugène removes his headquarters to Leipsic.

  _March 12th._--French evacuate Hamburg.

  _March 21st._--Russians and Prussians take new town of Dresden.

  _April 1st._--France declares war on Prussia.

  _April 10th._--_Death of Lagrange, mathematician_; _greatly bemoaned
  by Napoleon, who considered his death as a "presentiment"_
  (D'Abrantès).

  _April 14th._--Swedish army lands in Germany.

  _April 15th.--Napoleon leaves Paris; arrives Erfurt (April 25th)._
  Americans take Mobile.

  _April 16th._--Thorn (garrisoned by 900 Bavarians) surrenders to
  the Russians. Fort York (now Toronto) and

  _April 27th._--Upper Canada taken by the Americans.

  _May 1st._--Death of the Abbé Delille, poet. Opening of campaign.
  French forces scattered in Germany, 166,000 men; Allies' forces
  ready for action, 225,000 men. Marshal Bessières killed by a
  cannon-ball at Poserna.

  _May 2nd.--Napoleon with 90,000 men defeats Prussians and Russians
  at Lutzen (Gross-Goerschen) with 110,000; French loss, 10,000.
  Battle won_ _chiefly by French artillery. Emperor of Russia and
  King of Prussia present._

  _May 8th.--Napoleon and the French reoccupy Dresden._

  _May 18th._--Eugène reaches Milan, and enrols an Italian army
  47,000 strong.

  _May 19th-21st.--Combats of Konigswartha, Bautzen, Hochkirch,
  Würschen. Napoleon defeats Prussians and Russians; French loss,
  12,000; Allies, 20,000._

  _May 23rd.--Duroc (shot on May 22nd) dies. "Duroc," said the
  Emperor, "there is another life. It is there you will go to await
  me, and there we shall meet again some day."_

  _May 27th._--Americans capture Fort George (Lake Ontario) and

  _May 29th._--Defeat English at Sackett's Harbour.

  _May 30th._--French re-enter Hamburg and

  _June 1st._--Occupy Breslau. British frigate _Shannon_ captures
  _Chesapeake_ in fifteen minutes outside Boston harbour.

  _June 4th.--Armistice of Plesswitz, between Napoleon and the
  Allies._

  _June 6th._--Americans (3500) surprised at Burlington Heights by
  700 British.

  _June 15th.--Siege of Tarragona raised by Suchet; English
  re-embark, leaving their artillery. "If I had had two marshals
  such as Suchet, I should not only have conquered Spain, but I
  should have kept it"_ (_Napoleon in_ Campan's Memoirs).

  _June 21st._--Battle of Vittoria; total rout of the French under
  Marshal Jourdan and King Joseph. In retreat the army is much more
  harassed by the guerillas than by the English.

  _June 23rd._--Admiral Cockburn defeated at Craney Island by
  Americans.

  _June 24th._--Five hundred Americans surrender to two hundred
  Canadians at Beaver's Dams.

  _June 25th._--Combat of Tolosa. Foy stops the advance of the
  English right wing.

  _June 30th.--Convention at Dresden. Napoleon accepts the mediation
  of Austria; armistice prolonged to August 10th._

  _July 1st._--Soult sent to take chief command in Spain.

  _July 10th._--Alliance between France and Denmark.

  _July 12th.--Congress of Prague. Austria, Prussia, and Russia
  decide that Germany must be independent, and the French Empire
  bounded by the Rhine and the Alps; "but to reign over 36,000,000
  men did not appear to Napoleon a sufficiently great destiny"_
  (Montgaillard). _Congress breaks up July 28th._

  _July 26th._--Moreau arrives from U.S., and lands at Gothenburg.

  _July 31st._--Soult attacks Anglo-Spanish army near Roncesvalles
  in order to succour Pampeluna. Is repulsed, with loss of 8000
  men.

  _August 12th._--Austria notifies its adhesion to the Allies.

  _August 15th.--Jomini, the Swiss tactician, turns traitor and
  escapes to the Allies. He advises them of Napoleon's plans to
  seize Berlin and relieve Dantzic [see letter to Ney, No. 19,714,
  20,006, and especially 20,360 (August 12th) in_ Correspondence].
  _On August 16th Napoleon writes to Cambacérès: "Jomini, Ney's
  chief of staff, has deserted. It is he who published some volumes
  on the campaigns and who has been in the pay of Russia for a long
  time. He has yielded to corruption. He is a soldier of little
  value, yet he is a writer who has grasped some of the sound
  principles of war."_

  _August 17th.--Renewal of hostilities in Germany. Napoleon's army,
  280,000, of whom half recruits who had never seen a battle; the
  Allies 520,000, excluding militia. In his counter-manifesto to
  Austria, dated Bautzen, Napoleon declares "Austria, the enemy of
  France, and cloaking her ambition under the mask of a mediation,
  complicated everything.... But Austria, our avowed foe, is in a
  truer guise, and one perfectly obvious. Europe is therefore much
  nearer peace; there is one complication the less."_

  _August 18th._--Suchet, having blown up fortifications of
  Tarragona, evacuates Valentia.

  _August 21st._--Opening of the campaign in Italy. Eugène, with
  50,000 men, commands the Franco-Italian army.

  _August 23rd._--Combats of Gross-Beeren and Ahrensdorf, near
  Berlin. Bernadotte defeats Oudinot with loss of 1500 men and 20
  guns. Berlin is preserved to the Allies. Oudinot replaced by Ney.
  Lauriston defeats Army of Silesia at Goldberg with heavy loss.

  _August 26th-27th.--Battle of Dresden.--Napoleon marches a hundred
  miles in seventy hours to the rescue. With less than 100,000 men
  he defeats the Allied Army of 180,000 under Schwartzenberg,
  Wittgenstein, and Kleist. Austrians lose 20,000 prisoners and 60
  guns. Moreau is mortally wounded (dies September 1st)._ Combat of
  the Katzbach, in Silesia. Blucher defeats Macdonald with heavy
  loss, who loses 10,000 to 12,000 men in his retreat.

  _August 30th._--Combat of Kulm. Vandamme enveloped in Bohemia, and
  surrenders with 12,000 men.

  _August 31st._--Combat of Irun. Soult attacks Wellington to save
  San Sebastian, but is repulsed. Graham storms San Sebastian.

  _September 6th._--Combat of Dennewitz (near Berlin). Ney routed by
  Bulow and Bernadotte; loses his artillery, baggage, and 12,000
  men.

  _September 10th_--Americans capture the English flotilla on Lake
  Erie.

  _September 12th._--Combat of Villafranca (near Barcelona). Suchet
  defeats English General Bentinck.

  _October 7th._--Wellington crosses the Bidassoa into France. "It
  is on the frontier of France itself that ends the enterprise of
  Napoleon on Spain. The Spaniards have given the first conception
  of a people's war versus a war of professionals. For it would be a
  mistake to think that the battles of Salamanca (July 22nd, 1812)
  and Vittoria (June 21st, 1813) forced the French to abandon the
  Peninsula.... It was the daily losses, the destruction of man by
  man, the drops of French blood falling one by one, which in five
  years aggregated a death-roll of 150,000 men. As to the English,
  they appeared in this war only as they do in every world-crisis,
  to gather, in the midst of general desolation, the fruits of their
  policy, and to consolidate their plans of maritime despotism, of
  exclusive commerce" (Montgaillard).

  _October 15th._--Bavarian army secedes and joins the Austrians.

  _October 16th-19th.--Battles of Leipsic._ _Allied army_ 330,000
  men (_Schwartzenberg_, _Bernadotte_, _Blucher_, _Beningsen_),
  _Napoleon_ 175,000. _Twenty-six battalions and ten squadrons of
  Saxon and Wurtemberg men leave Napoleon and turn their guns
  against the French. Napoleon is not defeated, but determines to
  retreat. The rearguard (20,000 men) and 200 cannon taken.
  Poniatowski drowned; Reynier and Lauriston captured._

  _October 20th._--Blucher made Field-Marshal.

  _October 23rd._--French army reach Erfurt.

  _October 30th.--Combat of Hanau. Napoleon defeats Wrede with heavy
  loss._

  _October 31st._--Combat and capture of Bassano by Eugène. English
  capture Pampeluna.

  _November 2nd.--Napoleon arrives at Mayence (where typhus carries
  off 40,000 French), and is_

  _November 9th.--At St. Cloud._

  _November 10th._--Wellington defeats Soult at St. Jean de Luz.

  _November 11th._--Surrender of Dresden by Gouvion St. Cyr; its
  French soldiers to return under parole to France. Austrians refuse
  to ratify the convention, and 1700 officers and 23,000 men remain
  prisoners of war.

  _November 14th.--Napoleon addresses the Senate: "All Europe
  marched with us a year ago; all Europe marches against us to-day.
  That is because the world's opinion is directed either by France
  or England."_

  _November 15th._--Eugène defeats Austrians at Caldiero.
  Senatus-Consultus puts 300,000 conscripts at disposal of
  government.

  _November 24th._--Capture of Amsterdam by Prussian General Bulow.

  _December 1st._--Allies declare at Frankfort that they are at war
  with the Emperor and not with France.

  _December 2nd._--Bulow occupies Utrecht. Holland secedes from the
  French Empire.

  _December 5th._--Capture of Lubeck by the Swedes, and surrender of
  Stettin (7000 prisoners), Zamosk (December 22nd), Modlin (December
  25th), and Torgau (December 26th, with 10,000 men).

  _December 8th-13th._--Soult defends the passage of the Nive--costly
  to both sides. Murat (now hostile to Napoleon) enters Ancona.

  _December 9th-10th._--French evacuate Breda.

  _December 11th.--Treaty of Valençay between Napoleon and his
  prisoner Ferdinand VII., who is to reign over Spain, but not to
  cede Minorca or Ceuta (now in their power} to the English._

  _December 15th._--Denmark secedes from French alliance.

  _December 21st._--Allies, 100,000 strong, cross the Rhine in ten
  divisions (Bâle to Schaffhausen). Jomini is said to have
  contributed to this violation of Swiss territory.

  _December 24th._--Final evacuation of Holland by the French.

  _December 28th._--Austrians capture Ragusa.

  _December 31st.--Napoleon, having trouble with his Commons,
  dissolves the Corps Législatif._ Austrians capture Geneva. Blucher
  crosses the Rhine at Mannheim and Coblentz. Exclusive of Landwehr
  and levies en masse, there are now a million trained men in arms
  against Napoleon.

       *       *       *       *       *

1814.

  "The Allied Powers having proclaimed that the Emperor Napoleon was
  the sole obstacle to the re-establishment of the Peace of Europe,
  the Emperor Napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he
  renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of France and
  Italy, and that there is no personal sacrifice, even that of life
  itself, that he will not be ready to make for the sake of
  France."--(_Act of Abdication._)

       *       *       *       *       *

  _January 1st._--Capitulation of Danzic, which General Rapp had
  defended for nearly a year, having lost 20,000 (out of 30,000) men
  by fever. Russians, who had promised to send the French home,
  break faith, following the example of Schwartzenberg at Dresden.

  _January 2nd._--Russians take Fort Louis (Lower Rhine); and

  _January 3rd._--Austrians Montbéliard; and Bavarians Colmar.

  _January 6th._--General York occupies Trèves. Convention between
  Murat and England and (January 11th) with Austria. Murat is to
  join Allies with 30,000 men.

  _January 7th._--Austrians occupy Vesoul.

  _January 8th._--French Rentes 5 per cents. at 47.50. Wurtemberg
  troops occupy Epinal.

  _January 10th._--General York reaches Forbach (on the Moselle).

  _January 15th._--Cossacks occupy Cologne.

  _January 16th._--Russians occupy Nancy.

  _January 19th._--Austrians occupy Dijon; Bavarians, Neufchâteau.
  Murat's troops occupy Rome.

  _January 20th._--Capture of Toul by the Russians; and of Chambéry
  by the Austrians.

  _January 21st._--Austrians occupy Châlons-sur-Saône. General York
  crosses the Meuse.

  _January 23rd._--Pope Pius VII. returns to Rome.

  _January 25th._--General York and Army of Silesia established at
  St. Dizier and Joinville on the Marne. Austrians occupy
  Bar-sur-Aube. _Napoleon leaves Paris; and_

  _January 26th.--Reaches Châlons-sur-Marne; and_

  _January 27th.--Retakes St. Dizier in person._

  _January 29th.--Combat of Brienne. Napoleon defeats Blucher._

  _February 1st._--Battle of La Rothière, six miles north of
  Brienne. French, 40,000; Allies, 110,000. Drawn battle, but French
  retreat on Troyes; French evacuate Brussels.

  _February 4th._--Eugène retires upon the Mincio.

  _February 5th.--Cortes disavow Napoleon's treaty of Valençay with
  Ferdinand VII._ Opening of Congress of Châtillon. General York
  occupies Châlons-sur-Marne.

  _February 7th._--Allies seize Troyes.

  _February 8th._--Battle of the Mincio. Eugène with 30,000
  conscripts defeats Austrians under Bellegarde with 50,000
  veterans.

  _February 10th.--Combat of Champaubert. Napoleon defeats
  Russians._

  _February 11th.--Combat of Montmirail. Napoleon defeats Sacken.
  Russians occupy Nogent-sur-Seine; and_

  _February 12th.--Laon._

  _February 14th.--Napoleon routs Blucher at Vauchamp. His losses,
  10,000 men; French loss, 600 men. In five days Napoleon has wiped
  out the five corps of the Army of Silesia, inflicting a loss of
  25,000 men._

  _February 17th.--Combat near Nangis. Napoleon defeats Austro-Russians
  with loss of 10,000 men and 12 cannon._

  _February 18th._--Combat of Montereau. Prince Royal of Wurtemberg
  defeated with loss of 7000.

  _February 21st._--Comte d'Artois arrives at Vesoul.

  _February 22nd._--Combat of Méry-sur-Seine. Sacken defeated by
  Boyer's Division, who fight in masks--it being Shrove Tuesday.

  _February 24th._--French re-enter Troyes.

  _February 27th._--Bulow captures La Fère with large stores. Battle
  of Orthes (Pyrenees), Wellington with 70,000 defeats Soult
  entrenched with 38,000. Foy badly wounded.

  _February 27th-28th._--Combats of Bar and Ferté-sur-Aube. Marshals
  Oudinot and Macdonald forced to retire on the Seine.

  _March 1st._--Treaty of Chaumont--Allies against Napoleon.

  _March 2nd._--Bulow takes Soissons.

  _March 4th._--Macdonald evacuates Troyes.

  _March 7th.--Battle of Craonne between Napoleon (30,000 men) and
  Sacken (100,000)._ Indecisive.

  _March 9th._--English driven from Berg-op-Zoom.

  _March 9th-10th.--Combat under Laon: depôt of Allied army.
  Napoleon fails to capture it._

  _March 12th._--Duc d'Angoulême arrives at Bordeaux. This town is
  the first to declare for the Bourbons, and to welcome him as Louis
  XVIII.

  _March 13th._--Ferdinand VII. set at liberty.

  _March 14th.--Napoleon retakes Rheims from the Russians._

  _March 19th._--Rupture of Treaty of Châtillon.

  _March 20th._--Battle of Tarbes. Wellington defeats French.

  _March 20th-21st._--Battle of Arcis-sur-Aube. Indecisive.

  _March 21st._--Austrians enter Lyons. Augereau retires on Valence.
  Had Eugène joined him with his 40,000 men he might have saved
  France after Vauchamp.

  _March 25th._--Combat of Fère-Champenoise. Marmont and Mortier
  defeated with loss of 9000 men.

  _March 26th.--Combat of St. Dizier. Napoleon defeats Russians, and
  starts to save Paris._

  _March 29th.--Allies outside Paris. Napoleon at Troyes (125 miles
  off)._

  _March 30th.--Battle of Paris._ The Emperor's orders disobeyed.
  Heavy cannon from Cherbourg left outside Paris, also 20,000
  men. Clarke deserts to the Allies. Joseph runs away, leaving
  Marmont permission to capitulate. After losing 5000 men (and
  Allies 8000) Marmont evacuates Paris and retires. _Napoleon
  reaches Fontainebleau in the evening, and hears the bad news._

  _March 31st._--Emperor of Russia, King of Prussia, and 36,000 men
  enter Paris. Stocks and shares advance. Emperor Alexander states,
  "The Allied Sovereigns will treat no longer with Napoleon
  Bonaparte, nor any of his family."

  _April 1st._--Senate, with Talleyrand as President, institute a
  Provisional Government.

  _April 2nd._--Provisional Government address the army: "You are no
  longer the soldiers of Napoleon; the Senate and the whole of
  France absolve you from your oaths." They also declare Napoleon
  deposed from the throne, and his family from the succession.

  _April 4th.--Napoleon signs a declaration of abdication in favour
  of his son, but after two days' deliberation, and Marmont's
  defection, Alexander insists on an absolute abdication._

  _April 5th._--Convention of Chevilly. Marmont agrees to join the
  Provisional Government, and disband his army under promise that
  Allies will guarantee life and liberty to Napoleon Bonaparte.
  Funds on March 29th at 45, now at 63.75.

  _April 6th._--New Constitution decreed by the Senate. The National
  Guard ordered to wear the White Cockade in lieu of the Tricolor.

  _April 10th._--Battle of Toulouse. Hotly contested; almost a
  defeat for Wellington.

  _April 11th.--Treaty of Paris between Napoleon and Allies
  (Austria, Russia, and Prussia). Isle of Elba reserved for Napoleon
  and his family, with a revenue of £200,000; the Duchies of Parma
  and Placentia for Marie Louise and her son. England accedes to
  this Treaty. Act of Abdication of the Emperor Napoleon._

  _April 12th._--Count d'Artois enters Paris.

  _April 16th._--Convention between Eugène and Austrian General
  Bellegarde. Emperor of Austria sees Marie Louise at the little
  Trianon, and decides upon his daughter's return to Vienna.

  _April 18th._--Armistice of Soult and Wellington.

  _April 20th.--Napoleon leaves Fontainebleau, and bids adieu to his
  Old Guard: "Do not mourn over my fate; if I have determined to
  survive, it is in order still to dedicate myself to your glory; I
  wish to write about the great things we have done together."_

  _April 24th._--Louis XVIII. lands at Calais, and

  _May 3rd._---Enters Paris.

  _May 4th.---Napoleon reaches Elba._

  _May 29th.--Death of Josephine, aged 51._

  _May 30th.--Peace of Paris._


FOOTNOTES

  [40] Averaged from early historians of the campaigns. Marbot gives the
       numbers 155,400 French and 175,000 Allies. Allowing for the
       secession of the Austrian and Prussian contingents and for
       30,000 prisoners, he gives the actual French death-roll by
       February 1813 at 65,000. This is a minimum estimate.




NOTES

_THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGNS, 1796-97_




SERIES A

(_The numbers correspond to the numbers of the Letters._)


No. 1.

_Bonaparte made Commander-in-Chief of the Army of Italy._--Marmont's
account of how this came to pass is probably substantially correct, as
he has less interest in distorting the facts than any other writer as
well fitted for the task. The winter had rolled by in the midst of
pleasures--soirées at the Luxembourg, dinners of Madame Tallien,
"nor," he adds, "were we hard to please." "The Directory often
conversed with General Bonaparte about the army of Italy, whose
general--Schérer--was always representing the position as difficult,
and never ceasing to ask for help in men, victuals, and money. General
Bonaparte showed, in many concise observations, that all that was
superfluous. He strongly blamed the little advantage taken from the
victory at Loano, and asserted that, even yet, all that could be put
right. Thus a sort of controversy was maintained between Schérer and
the Directory, counselled and inspired by Bonaparte." At last when
Bonaparte drew up plans--afterwards followed--for the invasion of
Piedmont, Schérer replied roughly that he who had drawn up the plan of
campaign had better come and execute it. They took him at his word,
and Bonaparte was named General-in-Chief of the army of Italy (vol. i.
93).

"_7 A.M._"--Probably written early in March. Leaving Paris on March
11th, Napoleon writes Letourneur, President of the Directory, of his
marriage with the "citoyenne Tascher Beauharnais," and tells him that
he has already asked Barras to inform them of the fact. "The
confidence which the Directory has shown me under all circumstances
makes it my duty to keep it advised of all my actions. It is a new
link which binds me to the fatherland; it is one more proof of my
fixed determination to find safety only in the Republic."[41]


No. 2.

"_Our good Ossian._"--The Italian translation of Ossian by Cesarotti
was a masterpiece; better, in fact, than the original. He was a friend
of Macpherson, and had learnt English in order to translate his work.
Cesarotti lived till an advanced age, and was sought out in his
retirement in order to receive honours and pensions from the Emperor
Napoleon.

"Our good Ossian" speaks, like Homer, of the joy of grief.


No. 4.

"_Chauvet is dead._"--Chauvet is first mentioned in Napoleon's
correspondence in a letter to his brother Joseph, August 9, 1795.
Mdme. Junot, _Memoirs_, i. 138, tells us that Bonaparte was very fond
of him, and that he was a man of gentle manners and very ordinary
conversation. She declares that Bonaparte had been a suitor for the
hand of her mother shortly before his marriage with Josephine, and
that because the former rejected him, the general had refused a favour
to her son; this had caused a quarrel which Chauvet had in vain tried
to settle. On March 27th Bonaparte had written Chauvet from Nice that
every day that he delayed joining him, "takes away from my operations
one chance of probability for their success."


No. 5.

St. Amand notes that Bonaparte begins to suspect his wife in this
letter, while the previous ones, especially that of April 3rd, show
perfect confidence. Napoleon is on the eve of a serious battle, and
has only just put his forces into fighting trim. On the previous day
(April 6th) he wrote to the Directory that the movement against Genoa,
of which he does not approve, has brought the enemy out of their
winter quarters almost before he has had time to make ready. "The army
is in a state of alarming destitution; I have still great difficulties
to surmount, but they are surmountable: misery has excused want of
discipline, and without discipline never a victory. I hope to have all
in good trim shortly--there are signs already; in a few days we shall
be fighting. The Sardinian army consists of 50,000 foot, and 5000
horse; I have only 45,000 men at my disposal, all told. Chauvet, the
commissary-general, died at Genoa: it is a heavy loss to the army, he
was active and enterprising."

Two days later Napoleon, still at Albenga, reports that he has found
Royalist traitors in the army, and complains that the Treasury had not
sent the promised pay for the men, "but in spite of all, we shall
advance." Massena, eleven years older than his new commander-in-chief,
had received him coldly, but soon became his right-hand man, always
genial, and full of good ideas. Massena's men are ill with too much
salt meat, they have hardly any shoes, but, as in 1800,[42] he has
never a doubt that Bonaparte will make a good campaign, and determines
to loyally support him. Poor Laharpe, so soon to die, is a man of a
different stamp--one of those, doubtless, of whom Bonaparte thinks
when he writes to Josephine, "Men worry me." The Swiss, in fact, was a
chronic grumbler, but a first-rate fighting man, even when his men
were using their last cartridges.

"_The lovers of nineteen._"--The allusion is lost. Aubenas, who
reproduces two or three of these letters, makes a comment to this
sentence, "Nous n'avons pu trouver un nom à mettre sous cette
fantasque imagination" (vol. i. 317).

"_My brother_," viz. Joseph.--He and Junot reached Paris in five days,
and had a great ovation. Carnot, at a dinner-party, showed Napoleon's
portrait next to his heart, because "I foresee he will be the saviour
of France, and I wish him to know that he has at the Directory only
admirers and friends."


No. 6.

_Unalterably good._--"C'est Joseph peint d'un seul trait."--Aubenas
(vol. i. 320).

"_If you want a place for any one, you can send him here. I will give
him one._"--Bonaparte was beginning to feel firm in the saddle,
while at Paris Josephine was treated like a princess. Under date
April 25th, Letourneur, as one of the Directory, writes him, "A vast
career opens itself before you; the Directory has measured the
whole extent of it." They little knew! The letter concludes by
expressing confidence that their general will never be reproached
with the shameful repose of Capua. In a further letter, bearing
the same date, Letourneur insists on a full and accurate account of
the battles being sent, as they will be necessary "for the history of
the triumphs of the Republic." In a private letter to the Directory
(No. 220, vol. i. of the _Correspondence_, 1858), dated Carru, April
24th, Bonaparte tells them that when he returns to camp, worn-out,
he has to work all night to put matters straight, and repress
pillage. "Soldiery without bread work themselves into an excess of
frenzy which makes one blush to be a man."[43]... "I intend to make
terrible examples. I shall restore order, or cease to command these
brigands. The campaign is not yet decided. The enemy is desperate,
numerous, and fights well. He knows I am in want of everything, and
trusts entirely to time; but I trust entirely to the good genius of
the Republic, to the bravery of the soldiers, to the harmony of the
officers, and even to the confidence they repose in me."


No. 7.

Aubenas goes into ecstasies over this letter, "the longest, most
eloquent, and most impassioned of the whole series" (vol. i. 322).

Facsimile of Letter dated April 24, 1796.

_June 15._--Here occurs the first gap in the correspondence, but
his letters to the Directory between this date and the last letter
to Josephine extant (April 24) are full of interest, including his
conscientious disobedience at Cherasco, and the aura of his destiny
to "ride the whirlwind and direct the storm" which first inspired him
after Lodi. On April 28th was signed the armistice of Cherasco, by
which his rear was secured by three strong fortresses.[44] He writes
the Directory that Piedmont is at their mercy, and that in making the
armistice into a definite peace he trusts they will not forget the
little island of Saint-Pierre, which will be more useful in the
future than Corsica and Sardinia combined. He looks upon northern
Italy as practically conquered, and speaks of invading Bavaria
through the Tyrol. "Prodigious" is practically the verdict of the
Directory, and later of Jomini. "My columns are marching; Beaulieu
flees. I hope to catch him. I shall impose a contribution of some
millions on the Duke of Parma: he will sue for peace: don't be in a
hurry, so that I may have time to make him also contribute to the
cost of the campaign, by replenishing our stores and rehorsing our
waggons at his expense." Bonaparte suggests that Genoa should pay
fifteen millions indemnity for the frigates and vessels taken in the
port. Certain risks had to be run in invading Lombardy, owing to want
of horse artillery, but at Cherasco he secured artillery and horses.
When writing to the Directory for a dozen companies, he tells them
not to entrust the execution of this measure "to the men of the
bureaus, for it takes them ten days to forward an order." Writing to
Carnot on the same day he states he is marching against Beaulieu,
who has 26,000 foot out of 38,000 at commencement of campaign.
Napoleon's force is 28,000, but he has less cavalry. On May 1st, in a
letter dated Acqui to Citizen Faipoult, he asks for particulars of
the pictures, statues, &c., of Milan, Parma, Placentia, Modena, and
Bologna. On the same day Massena writes that his men are needing
shoes. On May 6th Bonaparte announces the capture of Tortona, "a very
fine fortress, which cost the King of Sardinia over fifteen
millions," while Cherasco has furnished him with twenty-eight guns.
Meanwhile Massena has taken possession of Alessandria, with all its
stores. On May 9th Napoleon writes to Carnot, "We have at last
crossed the Po. The second campaign is begun; Beaulieu ... has
fool-hardiness but no genius. One more victory, and Italy is ours." A
clever commissary-general is all he needs, and his men are growing
fat--with good meat and good wine. He sends to Paris twenty old
masters, with fine examples of Correggio and Michael-Angelo. It is
pleasant to find Napoleon's confidence in Carnot, in view of Barras'
insinuations that the latter had cared only for Moreau--his type
of Xenophon. In this very letter Napoleon writes Carnot, "I owe you
my special thanks for the care that you have kindly given to my wife;
I recommend her to you, she is a sincere patriot, and I love her to
distraction." He is sending "a dozen millions" to France, and hopes
that some of it will be useful to the army of the Rhine. Meanwhile,
and two days before Napoleon's letter to Carnot just mentioned, the
latter, on behalf of the Directory, suggests the division of his
command with the old Alsatian General Kellermann. The Directory's
idea of a gilded pill seems to be a prodigiously long letter. It is
one of those heart-breaking effusions that, even to this day,
emanate from board-rooms, to the dismay and disgust of their
recipients. After plastering him with sickening sophistries as to
his "sweetest recompense," it gives the utterly unnecessary
monition, "March! no fatal repose, there are still laurels to
gather"! Nevertheless, his plan of ending the war by an advance
through the Tyrol strikes them as too risky. He is to conquer the
Milanais, and then divide his army with Kellermann, who is to guard
the conquered province, while he goes south to Naples and Rome. As an
implied excuse for not sending adequate reinforcements, Carnot adds,
"The exaggerated rumours that you have skilfully disseminated as to
the numbers of the French troops in Italy, will augment the fear
of our enemies and almost double your means of action." The
Milanais is to be heavily mulcted, but he is to be prudent. If Rome
makes advances, his first demand should be that the Pope may order
immediate public prayers for the prosperity and success of the French
Republic! The sending of old masters to France to adorn her National
Galleries seems to have been entirely a conception of Napoleon's. He
has given sufficiently good reasons, from a patriotic point of view;
for money is soon spent, but a masterpiece may encourage Art among
his countrymen a generation later. The plunderers of the Parthenon of
1800 could not henceforward throw stones at him in this respect. But
his real object was to win the people of Paris by thus sending them
Glory personified in unique works of genius.

The Directory, already jealous of his fame, endeavour to neutralise
the effect of his initiative by hearty concurrence, and write, "Italy
has been illumined and enriched by their possession, but the time is
now come when their reign should pass to France to stablish and
beautify that of Liberty." The despatch adds somewhat naïvely that the
effects of the vandalism committed during their own Republican orgies
would be obliterated by this glorious campaign, which should "join to
the splendour of military trophies the charm of beneficent and restful
arts." The Directory ends by inviting him to choose one or two artists
to select the most valuable pictures and other masterpieces.

Meanwhile, the Directory's supineness in pushing on the war on the
Rhine is enabling the Austrians to send large reinforcements against
Napoleon. Bonaparte, who has recently suffered (Jomini, vol. viii.
113) from Kellermann's tardiness in sending reinforcements at an
important moment, replies to the letters of May 7th a week later, and
writes direct to Citizen Carnot from Lodi, as well as to the Executive
Directory. "On the receipt of the Directory's letter of the 7th your
wishes were fulfilled, and the Milanais is ours. I shall shortly
march, to carry out your intentions, on Leghorn and Rome; all that
will soon be done. I am writing the Directory relatively to their idea
of dividing the army. I swear that I have no thought beyond the
interest of my country. Moreover, you will always find me straight
(_dans la ligne droite_).... As it might happen that this letter to
the Directory may be badly construed, and since you have assured me
of your friendship, I take this opportunity of addressing you, begging
you to make what use of it your prudence and attachment for me may
suggest.... Kellermann will command the army as well as I, for no one
is more convinced than I am that the victories are due to the courage
and pluck of the army; but I think joining Kellermann and myself in
Italy is to lose everything. I cannot serve willingly with a man who
considers himself the first general in Europe; and, besides, I believe
one bad general is better than two good ones. War is like government:
it is an affair of tact. To be of any use, I must enjoy the same
confidence that you testified to me in Paris. Where I make war, here
or there, is a matter of indifference. To serve my country, to deserve
from posterity a page in our history, to give the Government proofs of
my attachment and devotion--that is the sum of my ambition. But I am
very anxious not to lose in a week the fatigues, anxieties, and
dangers of two months, and to find myself fettered. I began with a
certain amount of fame; I wish to continue worthy of you." To the
Directory he writes that the expeditions to Leghorn, Rome, and Naples
are small affairs, but to be safely conducted must have one general in
command. "I have made the campaign without consulting a soul; I should
have done no good if I had had to share my views with another. I have
gained some advantages over superior forces, and in utter want of
everything, because, certain of your confidence, my marches have been
as quick as my thoughts." He foretells disaster if he is shackled with
another general. "Every one has his own method of making war. General
Kellermann has more experience, and will do it better than I; but both
together will do it very badly." With Barras he knew eloquence was
useless, and therefore bribed him with a million francs. On May 10th
was gained the terrible battle of the Bridge of Lodi, where he won
promotion from his soldiers, and became their "little corporal," and
where he told Las Cases that he "was struck with the possibility of
becoming famous. It was then that the first spark of my ambition was
kindled." On entering Milan he told Marmont, "Fortune has smiled on me
to-day, only because I despise her favours; she is a woman, and the
more she does for me, the more I shall exact from her. In our day no
one has originated anything great; it is for me to give the example."

On May 15th, thirty-five days after the commencement of the campaign,
he entered Milan, under a triumphal arch and amid the acclamations of
the populace. On the previous evening he was guilty of what Dr.
Johnson would have considered a fitting herald of his spoliation of
picture-galleries--the perpetration of a pun. At a dinner-table the
hostess observed that his youth was remarkable in so great a
conqueror, whereat he replied, "Truly, madam, I am not very old at
present--barely twenty-seven--but in less than twenty-four hours I
shall count many more, for I shall have attained Milan" (_mille
ans_).

On May 22nd he returned to Lodi, but heard immediately that Lombardy
in general, and Pavia in particular, was in open revolt. He makes a
terrible example of Pavia, shooting its chief citizens, and, for the
only time, giving up a town to three hours' pillage. The Directory
congratulates him on these severe measures: "The laws of war and the
safety of the army render them legitimate in such circumstances." He
writes them that had the blood of a single Frenchman been spilt, he
would have erected a column on the ruins of Pavia, on which should
have been inscribed, "Here was the town of Pavia."

On May 21st, Carnot replies to the letter from Lodi: "You appear
desirous, citizen general, of continuing to conduct the whole series
of military operations in Italy, at the actual seat of war. The
Directory has carefully considered your proposition, and the
confidence that they place in your talents and republican zeal has
decided this question in the affirmative.... The rest of the military
operations towards the Austrian frontier and round Mantua are
absolutely dependent on your success against Beaulieu. The Directory
feels how difficult it would be to direct them from Paris. It leaves
to you in this respect the greatest latitude, while recommending the
most extreme prudence. Its intention is, however, that the army shall
cross into the Tyrol only after the expedition to the south of
Italy."

This was a complete victory for Bonaparte (Bingham calls it the
Directory's "abject apology"), and, as Scott points out, he now
"obtained an ascendency which he took admirable care not to
relinquish; and it became the sole task of the Directory, so far as
Italy was concerned, to study phrases for intimating their approbation
of the young general's measures."

He had forged a sword for France, and he now won her heart by gilding
it. On May 16th the Directory had asked him to supply Kellermann with
money for the army of the Alps, and by May 22nd he is able to write
that six or eight million francs in gold, silver, ingots, or jewels is
lying at their disposal with one of the best bankers in Genoa, being
superfluous to the needs of the army. "If you wish it, I can have a
million sent to Bâle for the army of the Rhine." He has already helped
Kellermann, and paid his men. He also announces a further million
requisitioned from Modena. "As it has neither fortresses nor muskets,
I could not ask for them."

Henceforth he lubricates the manifold wheels of French policy with
Italian gold, and gains thereby the approbation and gratitude of the
French armies and people. Meanwhile he does not neglect those who
might bear him a grudge. To Kellermann and to all the Directors he
sends splendid chargers. From Parma he has the five best pictures
chosen for Paris--the Saint Jerome and the Madonna della Scodella,
both by Correggio; the Preaching of St. John in the Desert, a Paul
Veronese, and a Van Dyck, besides fine examples of Raphael, Caracci,
&c.

The Directory is anxious that he shall chastise the English at
Leghorn, as the fate of Corsica is somewhat dependent on it, whose
loss "will make London tremble." They secretly dread a war in the
Tyrol, forgetting that Bonaparte is a specialist in mountain fighting,
educated under Paoli. They remind him that he has not sent the plans
of his battles. "You ought not to lack draughtsmen in Italy. Eh! what
are your young engineer officers doing?"

On May 31st Carnot writes to urge him to press the siege of Mantua,
reasserting that the reinforcements which Beaulieu has received will
not take from that army its sense of inferiority, and that ten
battalions of Hoche's army are on the way. It approves and confirms
the "generous fraternity" with which Bonaparte offers a million francs
to the armies on the Rhine. On June 7th he tells the Directory that
Rome is about to fulminate a bull against the French Royalists, but
that he thinks the expedition to Naples should be deferred, and also a
quarrel with Venice--at least till he has beaten his other enemies; it
is not expedient to tackle every one at once. On June 6th he thanks
Carnot for a kind letter, adding that the best reward to sweeten
labour and perils is the esteem of the few men one really admires. He
fears the hot weather for his men: "we shall soon be in July, when
every march will cost us 200 sick." The same day he writes General
Clarke that all is flourishing, but that the dog-star is coming on at
a gallop, and that there is no remedy against its malign influence.
"Luckless beings that we are! Our position with nature is merely
observation, without control." He holds that the only safe way to end
the campaign without being beaten is not to go to the south of Italy.
On the 9th he thanks Kellermann for the troops he sends, and their
excellent discipline. On the 11th--always as anxious to help his
generals as himself--he urges the Directory to press the Swiss
Government to refund La Harpe's property to his children.

"_Presentiment of ill._"--Marmont tells us what this was. The glass of
his wife's portrait, which he always carried with him, was found to be
broken. Turning frightfully pale, he said to Marmont, "My wife is
either very ill, or unfaithful." She left Paris June 24th. Marmont
says, "Once at Milan, General Bonaparte was very happy, for at that
time he lived only for his wife.... Never love more pure, more true,
more exclusive, has possessed the heart of any man."


No. 8.

Between June 15th and the renewal of Josephine's correspondence a
glance at the intervening dates will show that Bonaparte and his army
were not wasting time. The treaty with Rome was a masterpiece, as in
addition to money and works of art, he obtained the port of Ancona,
siege-guns with which to bombard Mantua, and best of all, a letter
from the Pope to the faithful of France, recommending submission to
the new government there. In consideration of this, and possibly
yielding to the religious sentiments of Josephine, he spared Rome his
presence--the only capital which he abstained from entering, when he
had, as in the present case, the opportunity. It was not, however,
until February 1797 that the Pope fulfilled his obligations under this
